A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Performance of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is dictated by an anatomically appropriate culprit stenosis. *Patients with cardiogenic shock or severe heart failure initially seen at a non–PCI-capable hospital should be transferred for cardiac catheterization and revascularization as soon as possible, irrespective of time delay from myocardial infarction (MI) onset (Class I, LOE: B). †Angiography and revascularization should not be performed within the first 2 to 3 hours after administration of fibrinolytic therapy. CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; DIDO, door-in–door-out; FMC, first medical contact; LOE, level of evidence; STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction. (Adapted with permission from P O’Gara et al: Circulation 127:e362, 2013.) relative contraindications to beta blockade (PR interval greater than 0.24 seconds, secondor third-degree heart block, active asthma, or reactive airway disease). A commonly employed regimen is metoprolol, 5 mg every 2–5 min for a total of three doses, provided the patient has a heart rate >60 beats/min, systolic pressure >100 mmHg, a PR interval <0.24 s, and rales that are no higher than 10 cm up from the diaphragm. Fifteen minutes after the last intravenous dose, an oral regimen is initiated of 50 mg every 6 h for 48 h, followed by 100 mg every 12 h.

Unlike beta blockers, calcium antagonists are of little value in the acute setting, and there is evidence that short-acting dihydropyridines may be associated with an increased mortality risk. The primary tool for screening patients and making triage decisions is the initial 12-lead ECG. When ST-segment elevation of at least 2 mm in two contiguous precordial leads and 1 mm in two adjacent limb leads is present, a patient should be considered a candidate for reperfusion therapy (Fig. 295-4). The process of selecting patients for fibrinolysis versus primary PCI (angioplasty or stenting; Chap. 296e) is discussed below. In the absence of ST-segment elevation, fibrinolysis is not helpful, and evidence exists suggesting that it may be harmful. The quantity of myocardium that becomes necrotic as a consequence of a coronary artery occlusion is determined by factors other than just the site of occlusion.
2. Patients who have been admitted repeatedly to the hospital for a suspected acute coronary syndrome (Chaps. 294 and 295), but in whom this diagnosis has not been established and in whom the presence or absence of CAD should be determined. 1586 3. Patients with careers that involve the safety of others (e.g., pilots, firefighters, police) who have questionable symptoms or suspicious or positive noninvasive tests and in whom there are reasonable doubts about the state of the coronary arteries. 4. Patients with aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and angina in whom the chest pain could be due to IHD. 5. Male patients >45 years and females >55 years who are to undergo a cardiac operation such as valve replacement or repair and who may or may not have clinical evidence of myocardial ischemia. 6. Patients after myocardial infarction, especially those who are at high risk after myocardial infarction because of the recurrence of angina or the presence of heart failure, frequent ventricular premature contractions, or signs of ischemia on the stress test. 7. Patients with angina pectoris, regardless of severity, in whom noninvasive testing indicates a high risk of coronary events (poor exercise performance or severe ischemia). 8. Patients in whom coronary spasm or another nonatherosclerotic cause of myocardial ischemia (e.g., coronary artery anomaly, Kawasaki disease) is suspected.
Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74:1. Wei J et al: Nicorandil stimulates a Na+/Ca2+ exchanger by activating guanylate cyclase in guinea pig cardiac myocytes. Pflugers Arch 2016;468:693. The case described is typical of coronary artery disease in a patient with hyperlipidemia. Her hyperlipidemia should be treated vigorously to slow progression of, and if pos-sible reverse, the coronary lesions that are present (see Chapter 35). Coronary angiography is not indicated unless symptoms become much more frequent and severe; revas-cularization may then be considered. Medical treatment of her acute episodes of angina should include sublingual tab-lets or sublingual nitroglycerin spray 0.4–0.6 mg. Relief of discomfort within 2–4 minutes can be expected. To prevent episodes of angina, a βblocker such as metoprolol should be tried first. If contraindications to the use of a β blocker are present, a mediumto long-acting calcium channel blocker such as verapamil, diltiazem, or amlodipine is likely to be effective. Because of this patient’s family history, an antiplatelet drug such as low-dose aspirin is indicated. Care-ful follow-up is mandatory with repeat lipid panels, repeat dietary counseling, and lipid-lowering therapy; coronary angiography should also be considered if her condition worsens. Sildenafil Viagra, Revatio

Tadalafil Cialis, Adcirca

Cilostazol Generic, Pletal

Pentoxifylline Generic, Trental

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 55-year-old man noticed shortness of breath with exer-tion while on a camping vacation in a national park. He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue.
4. The superior constrictor muscles of the pharynx then contract strongly to force the bolus deeply into the pharynx. A peristaltic wave is initiated with contraction of the pharyngeal superior constrictor muscles, and the wave moves toward the esophagus. This wave forces the bolus of food through the relaxed UES. During the pharyngeal stage of swallowing, respiration is also reflexively inhibited. After the bolus of food passes the UES, a reflex action causes the sphincter to constrict. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is commonly referred to as heartburn or indigestion. It occurs when the lower esophageal sphincter allows the acidic contents of the stomach to reflux back into the distal part of the esophagus. This region of the esophagus, unlike the stomach, does not have a robust system to protect the mucosal lining. Thus the acid will activate pain fibers and thereby result in discomfort and pain. This is not an uncommon phenomenon, even in healthy individuals. In the long term, continual reflux can result in damage to the esophageal mucosa. In this case, this condition is classed as GERD and can be treated by H2 receptor antagonists that reduce gastric acid secretion (e.g., ranitidine [Zantac]) or by proton pump inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole [Prilosec]). The esophagus, the UES, and the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) serve two main functions (

Fig. 28.6 ).
Frequently, repetitive secondary peristalsis is required to clear the esophagus of the bolus. Stimulation of the pharynx by the swallowed bolus also produces reflex relaxation of the LES and the most proximal region of the stomach. Thus when the bolus reaches the LES, it is already relaxed to allow passage of the bolus into the stomach. Similarly the portion of the stomach that receives the bolus is relaxed. In addition, esophageal distention produces further receptive relaxation of the stomach. The proximal part of the stomach relaxes at the same time as the LES; this occurs with each swallow, and its function is to allow the stomach to accommodate large volumes with a minimal rise in intragastric pressure. This process is called receptive relaxation (

Fig. 28.8

The LES also has important protective functions. It is involved in preventing acid reflux from the stomach back into the esophagus. An insufficient tonic contraction of the LES is associated with reflux disease, a gradual erosion of the esophageal mucosa, which is not as well protected as the gastric and duodenal mucosa. There is also some evidence that peristalsis in the absence of swallowing (secondary peristalsis) is important for clearing refluxed gastric contents. 1. The cephalic and oral phases of the meal share many characteristics and prepare the remainder of the GI tract for the meal; these responses are neurally mediated, predominantly by the efferent vagus nerve. 2. Salivary secretion has important functions and, together with chewing of the food, allows the formation of a bolus that can be swallowed and passed along the esophagus to the stomach.
Therefore the function of this region is highly regulated by feedback mechanisms that involve hormonal, paracrine, and neural pathways. The stimuli that regulate these processes are both mechanical and chemical and include distention of the intestinal wall and the presence of increased [H+], high osmolarity, and nutrients in the intestinal lumen. These stimuli result in a set of changes that represent the intestinal phase of the response to the meal: (1) increased pancreatic secretion, (2) increased gallbladder contraction, (3) relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi, (4) regulation of gastric emptying, (5) inhibition of gastric acid secretion, and (6) interruption of the migrating motor complex (MMC). The goal of this chapter is to discuss how such changes are brought about and how they result ultimately in assimilation of nutrients. Changes in small intestinal function that occur after the meal has passed through will also be addressed. Gastric Emptying in the Small Intestinal Phase

Immediately after a meal the stomach may contain up to a liter of material that will empty slowly into the small intestine. The rate of gastric emptying is dependent on the macronutrient content of the meal and the amount of solids it contains. Thus solids and liquids of similar nutritional composition will empty at different rates. Liquids empty rapidly, but solids do so only after a lag phase, which means that after a solid meal, there is a period of time during which little or no emptying occurs (Fig. 30.1

Regulation of gastric emptying is achieved by alterations in motility of the proximal part of the stomach (fundus and corpus) and distal part of the stomach (antrum and pylorus) as well as in the duodenum. Motor function in these regions is highly coordinated. Recall that during the esophageal and gastric phase of the meal, the predominant reflex response is receptive relaxation. At the same time, peristaltic movements in the more distal part of the stomach (antrum) mix the gastric contents with gastric secretions. The pyloric sphincter is largely closed. Even if it opens periodically, little emptying will occur, because the proximal portion of the stomach is relaxed and the antral pump (antral contractions) is not very strong.
The afferent sen-sory nerves of the pharynx are the glossopharyngeal nerves and the superior laryngeal branches of the vagus nerves. Once aroused by stimuli entering via these nerves, the swallowing center in the medulla coordinates the complete act of swallow-ing by discharging impulses through cranial nerves V, VII, X, XI, and XII, as well as the motor neurons of C1 to C3. Dis-charges through these nerves occur in a rather specific pattern and last for approximately 0.5 seconds. Little is known about the organization of the swallowing center, except that it can trigger swallowing after a variety of different inputs, but the response is always a rigidly ordered pattern of outflow. Following a cere-brovascular accident, this coordinated outflow may be altered, causing mild to severe abnormalities of swallowing. In more severe injury, swallowing can be grossly disrupted, leading to repetitive aspiration.The striated muscles of the cricopharyngeus and the upper one-third of the esophagus are activated by efferent motor fibers distributed through the vagus nerve and its recurrent laryngeal branches. The integrity of innervation is required for the cri-copharyngeus to relax in coordination with the pharyngeal contraction, and resume its resting tone once a bolus has entered the upper esophagus. Operative damage to the innervation can interfere with laryngeal, cricopharyngeal, and upper esophageal function, and predispose the patient to aspiration.The pharyngeal activity in swallowing initiates the esoph-ageal phase. The body of the esophagus functions as a worm-drive propulsive pump due to the helical arrangement of its circular muscles, and it is responsible for transferring a bolus of food into the stomach. The esophageal phases of swallow-ing represent esophageal work done during alimentation, in that food is moved into the stomach from a negative-pressure environment of –6 mmHg intrathoracic pressure, to a positive-pressure environment of 6 mmHg intra-abdominal pressure, or over a gradient of 12 mmHg (see Fig. 25-13). Effective and coordinated smooth muscle function in the lower one-third of the esophagus is therefore important in pumping the food across this gradient.The peristaltic wave generates an occlusive pressure vary-ing from 30 to 120 mmHg (see Fig. 25-14). The wave rises to a peak in 1 second, lasts at the peak for about 0.5 seconds, and then subsides in about 1.5 seconds. The whole course of the rise and fall of occlusive pressure may occupy one point in the esophagus for 3 to 5 seconds.
Sensory input (e.g., smell) stimulates sensory nerves that activate parasympathetic outflow from the brainstem. Higher brain sites (e.g., limbic system, hypothalamus, cortex) are also involved in the cognitive components of this response. The response can be both positive and negative; thus anticipation of food and a person’s psychological status, such as anxiety, can alter the cognitive response to a meal. However, the final common pathway is activation of the dorsal motor nucleus in the brainstem, the region where the cell bodies of the vagal preganglionic neurons arise. Activation of the nucleus leads to increased activity in efferent fibers passing to the GI tract in the vagus nerve. In turn the efferent fibers activate the postganglionic motor neurons (referred to as motor because their activation results in change of function of an effector cell). Increased parasympathetic outflow enhances salivary secretion, gastric acid secretion, pancreatic enzyme secretion, gallbladder contraction, and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi (the sphincter between the common bile duct and duodenum). All these responses enhance the ability of the GI tract to receive and digest the incoming food. The salivary response is mediated via the ninth cranial nerve; the remaining responses are mediated via the vagus nerve. Many of the features of the oral phase are indistinguishable from the cephalic phase. The only difference is that food is in contact with the surface of the GI tract. Thus there are additional stimuli generated from the mouth, both mechanical and chemical (taste). However, many of

CHAPTER 28 The Cephalic, Oral, and Esophageal Phases of the Integrated Response to a Meal the responses initiated by the presence of food in the oral cavity are identical to those initiated in the cephalic phase, because the efferent pathway is the same. The responses specifically initiated in the mouth, which consist mainly of the stimulation of salivary secretion, will be discussed next. The mouth is important for the mechanical disruption of food and for initiation of digestion.
He has a temperature of 38.6°C (101.5°F) and the physical exam reveals nuchal rigidity and right-sided sixth cranial nerve palsy. MRI of his brain is normal, and lumbar puncture reveals 330 WBC with 20% eosinophils, protein 75, and glucose 20. HIV test is negative, TB skin test is negative, CSF cryptococcal antigen is negative, and CSF gram stain is negative. Patient receives empiric therapy for bacterial meningitis with van-comycin and ceftriaxone, and is unimproved after 72 hours of treatment. After 3 days a white mold is identified growing from his CSF culture. What medical therapy would be most appropriate now? Human fungal infections have increased dramatically in incidence and severity in recent years, owing mainly to advances in surgery, cancer treatment, treatment of patients with solid organ and bone marrow transplantation, the HIV epidemic, and increasing use of broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy in critically ill patients. These changes have resulted in increased numbers of patients at risk for fungal infections. For many years, amphotericin B was the only efficacious antifungal drug available for systemic use. While highly effective in many serious infections, it is also quite toxic. In the last several decades, pharmacotherapy of fungal disease has been revolutionized by the introduction of the relatively nontoxic azole drugs (both oral and parenteral formulations) and the echinocandins (only available for parenteral administration). The new agents in these classes offer more targeted, less toxic therapy than older agents such as amphotericin B for patients with serious systemic fungal infections. Combination therapy is being reconsidered, and new formulations of old agents are becoming available. Unfortunately, the appearance of azoleresistant and echinocandin-resistant organisms, as well as the rise in the number of patients at risk for mycotic infections, has created new challenges. The antifungal drugs presently available fall into the following categories: systemic drugs (oral or parenteral) for systemic infections, oral systemic drugs for mucocutaneous infections, and topical drugs for mucocutaneous infections.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap. 24). Petechial rashes are typically seen with meningococcemia or Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF; see Fig. 25e-16); erythroderma is associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS) and drug fever. The soft tissue and muscle examination is critical. Areas of erythema or duskiness, edema, and tenderness may indicate underlying necrotizing fasciitis, myositis, or myonecrosis. The neurologic examination must include a careful assessment of mental status for signs of early encephalopathy. Evidence of nuchal rigidity or focal neurologic findings should be sought. DIAGNOSTIC WORKUP After a quick clinical assessment, diagnostic material should be obtained rapidly and antibiotic and supportive treatment begun. Blood (for cultures; baseline complete blood count with differential; measurement of serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and serum glucose; and liver function tests) can be obtained at the time an IV line is placed and before antibiotics are administered. The blood lactate concentration also should be measured. Three sets of blood cultures should be performed for patients with possible acute endocarditis. Asplenic patients should have a buffy coat examined for bacteria; these patients can have >106 organisms per milliliter of blood (compared with 104/mL in patients with an intact spleen). Blood smears from patients at risk for severe parasitic disease, such as malaria or babesiosis (Chap.
Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may establishthe cause of the alteration of consciousness. Appropriate neuroimaging should be performed to ensure that no added injury islikely to be inflicted with LP. The presence of red blood cells inthe CSF may suggest primary subarachnoid hemorrhage, parenchymal hemorrhage, or hemorrhagic infection (herpes simplexvirus), or it may be due to a traumatic procedure. White bloodcells in the CSF usually denote infectious meningitis or meningoencephalitis but may also be associated with vasculitis or parainfectious syndrome. Elevated CSF protein is seen in patientswith meningeal inflammation or tumors, and abnormal CSFglucose levels are also markers of infection and inflammation. The etiology of altered mental status determines the treatment. Ingestions may necessitate gastric lavage, charcoal administration, forced diuresis, dialysis, or specific antidotes (Chapter 45). Infections are treated with appropriate antibiotics or antiviral agents (Chapter 95). If mental status changes are due to increased ICP, acute medical interventions (osmotic agents, steroids, hyperventilation) must be instituted, emergent neuroimaging performed, and urgent neurosurgical consultation obtained. Structural brain lesions may necessitate medical treatment of increased ICP or surgical excision. The outcome of altered mental status relates to many variables, including etiology. Intoxication typically carries a good prognosis, whereas hypoxia carries a poor prognosis. Other prognostic factors include the duration of coma and the age of the patient; children have better outcomes than adults. Complete recovery from traumatic coma of several days’ duration is possible in children; however, many survivors of prolonged coma are left in a persistent vegetative state or with severe neuropsychiatric disability. Transient, Recurrent Depression of Consciousness

Episodic alteration or depression of consciousness with full recovery is usually due to seizure, migraine, syncope, or metabolic abnormality (hypoglycemia).
The presence of focal cerebral signs in a patient with chronic meningitis suggests the possibility of a brain abscess or other

Syphilis (secondary, tertiary) Treponema pallidum Mononuclear or mixed mononuclear-polymorphonuclear cells

Mononuclear cells except polymorphonuclear cells in early infection (commonly <500 WBC/μL); low CSF glucose, high protein

Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI to detect parenchymal, subdural, epidural, or sinus infection

Tuberculin skin test may be negative; AFB culture of CSF (sputum, urine, gastric contents if indicated); tuberculostearic acid detection in CSF; identify tubercle bacillus on acid-fast stain of CSF or protein pellicle; PCR

Serum Lyme antibody titer; Western blot confirmation; (patients with syphilis may have false-positive Lyme titer)

CSF VDRL; serum VDRL (or RPR); fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA) or MHA-TP; serum VDRL may be negative in tertiary syphilis History consistent with acute bacterial meningitis and incomplete treatment

Otitis media, pleuropulmonary infection, right-to-left cardiopulmonary shunt for brain abscess; focal neurologic signs; neck, back, ear, or sinus tenderness

Exposure history; previous tuberculous illness; immunosuppressed, anti-TNF therapy or AIDS; young children; fever, meningismus, night sweats, miliary TB on x-ray or liver biopsy; stroke due to arteritis

History of tick bite or appropriate exposure history; erythema chronicum migrans skin rash; arthritis, radiculopathy, Bell’s palsy, meningoencephalitis–multiple sclerosis-like syndrome

Appropriate exposure history; HIV-seropositive individuals at increased risk of aggressive infection; “dementia”; cerebral infarction due to endarteritis

Xylohypha (formerly Cladosporium) trichoides and other dark-walled (dematiaceous) fungi such as Curvularia, Drechslera; Mucor, and, after water aspiration, Pseudallescheria boydii, iatrogenic Exserohilum rostratum infection following spinal blocks

Acanthamoeba sp. causing granulomatous amebic encephalitis and meningoencephalitis in immunocompromised and debilitated individuals. Balamuthia mandrillaris causing chronic meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent hosts. Trichinella spiralis (trichinosis); Fasciola hepatica (liver fluke), Echinococcus cysts; Schistosoma sp. The former may produce a lymphocytic pleocytosis whereas the latter two may produce an eosinophilic response in CSF associated with cerebral cysts (Echinococcus) or granulomatous lesions of brain or spinal cord

Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast bacillus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EM, electron microscopy; FTA, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MHA-TP, microhemagglutination assay–T. pallidum; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PAS, periodic acid–Schiff; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin test; TB, tuberculosis; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratories test. Malignancy Mononuclear cells, elevated Repeated cytologic examination of Metastatic cancer of breast, lung, stomach, or pancreas; mela protein, low glucose large volumes of CSF; CSF exam by noma, lymphoma, leukemia; meningeal gliomatosis; meninpolarizing microscopy; clonal lympho-geal sarcoma; cerebral dysgerminoma; meningeal melanoma cyte markers; deposits on nerve roots or B cell lymphoma or meninges seen on myelogram or contrast-enhanced MRI; meningeal biopsy

Chemical Mononuclear or PMNs, low Contrast-enhanced CT scan or MRI; History of recent injection into the subarachnoid space; his-compounds (may glucose, elevated protein; xan-cerebral angiogram to detect tory of sudden onset of headache; recent resection of acouscause recurrent thochromia from subarachnoid aneurysm tic neuroma or craniopharyngioma; epidermoid tumor of meningitis) hemorrhage in week prior to brain or spine, sometimes with dermoid sinus tract; pituitary presentation with “meningitis” apoplexy Primary inflammation CNS sarcoidosis Mononuclear cells; elevated Serum and CSF angiotensin-CN palsy, especially of CN VII; hypothalamic dysfunction, protein; often low glucose converting enzyme levels; biopsy of especially diabetes insipidus; abnormal chest radiograph; extraneural affected tissues or brain peripheral neuropathy or myopathy lesion/meningeal biopsy

Recurrent meningoencephalitis with uveitis, retinal detach-Harada syndrome ment, alopecia, lightening of eyebrows and lashes, dysacou(recurrent meningitis) sia, cataracts, glaucoma Isolated granuloma-Mononuclear cells, elevated Angiography or meningeal biopsy Subacute dementia; multiple cerebral infarctions; recent tous angiitis of the protein nervous system Systemic lupus Mononuclear or PMNs Anti-DNA antibody, antinuclear Encephalopathy; seizures; stroke; transverse myelopathy; rash; erythematosus antibodies arthritis Behçet’s syndrome Mononuclear or PMNs, elevated hemorrhages; pathergic lesions at site of skin puncture Chronic benign lym-Mononuclear cells

Recovery in 2–6 months, diagnosis by exclusion phocytic meningitis Mollaret’s meningitis Large endothelial cells and PCR for herpes; MRI/CT to rule out Recurrent meningitis; exclude HSV-2; rare cases due to HSV-1; (recurrent meningitis) PMNs in first hours, followed by epidermoid tumor or dural cyst occasional case associated with dural cyst mononuclear cells Drug hypersensitivity PMNs; occasionally mononu-Complete blood count (eosinophilia) Exposure to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, sulfonclear cells or eosinophils amides, isoniazid, tolmetin, ciprofloxacin, penicillin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, IV immunoglobulin, OKT3 antibodies, phenazopyridine; improvement after discontinuation of drug; recurrence with repeat exposure

Granulomatosis Mononuclear cells Chest and sinus radiographs; urinaly-Associated sinus, pulmonary, or renal lesions; CN palsies; skin with polyangiitis sis; ANCA antibodies in serum lesions; peripheral neuropathy (Wegener’s) Other: multiple sclerosis, Sjögren’s syndrome, monogenic autoinflammatory disorders, and rarer forms of vasculitis (e.g., Cogan’s syndrome)

Abbreviations: ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; CN, cranial nerve; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMNs, polymorphonuclear cells. parameningeal infection; identification of a potential source of outflow (obstructive hydrocephalus), then lumbar puncture carries infection (chronic draining ear, sinusitis, right-to-left cardiac or the potential risk of brain herniation. Obstructive hydrocephalus pulmonary shunt, chronic pleuropulmonary infection) supports this usually requires direct ventricular drainage. In patients with open diagnosis. In some cases, diagnosis may be established by recogni-CSF flow pathways, elevated ICP can still occur due to impaired tion and biopsy of unusual skin lesions (Behçet’s syndrome, SLE, resorption of CSF by arachnoid villi. In such patients, lumbar punccryptococcosis, blastomycosis, Lyme disease, sporotrichosis, trypano-ture is usually safe, but repetitive or continuous lumbar drainage may somiasis, IV drug use) or enlarged lymph nodes (lymphoma, sarcoid, be necessary to prevent abrupt deterioration and death from raised tuberculosis, HIV, secondary syphilis, or Whipple’s disease). A careful ICP. In some patients, especially those with cryptococcal meningiophthalmologic examination may reveal uveitis (Vogt-Koyanagi-tis, fatal levels of raised ICP can occur without enlarged ventricles. Harada syndrome, sarcoid, or central nervous system [CNS] lym-Contrast-enhanced MRI or CT studies of the brain and spinal phoma), keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Sjögren’s syndrome), or iridocy-cord can identify meningeal enhancement, parameningeal infecclitis (Behçet’s syndrome) and is essential to assess visual loss from tions (including brain abscess), encasement of the spinal cord papilledema.
Certain viruses are also related to cancers in the head and neck, including human papillomavirus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). A 50-year-old overweight woman came to the doctor complaining of hoarseness of voice and noisy breathing. She was also concerned at the increase in size of her neck. On examination she had a slow pulse rate (45 beats per minute). She also had an irregular knobby mass in the anterior aspect of the lower neck, which deviated the trachea to the right. A clinical diagnosis of a multinodular goiter and hypothyroidism was made. Enlargement of the thyroid gland is due to increased secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone, which is usually secondary to diminished output of thyroid hormones. The thyroid undergoes periods of activity and regression, which can lead to the formation of nodules, some of which are solid and some of which are partially cystic (colloid cysts). This nodule formation is compounded by areas of fibrosis within the gland. Other causes of multinodular goiter include iodine deficiency and in certain circumstances, drugs that interfere with the metabolism and production of thyroxine. The typical symptom of a goiter is a painless swelling of the thyroid gland. It may be smooth or nodular, and occasionally it may extend into the superior mediastinum as a retrosternal goiter. The trachea was deviated. The enlargement of the thyroid gland due to a multinodular goiter may not be symmetrical. In this case there was significant asymmetrical enlargement of the left lobe of the thyroid deviating the trachea to the right.
Any signs suggestive of the development of thyroid storm—including hemodynamic instability, tachycardia, arrhythmias, hyperreﬂexia, diarrhea, fever, delirium, or congestive heart failure— mandate transfer to an intensive care setting for optimal monitoring and management in consultation with a medical endocrinologist. Such thyroid instability can be triggered by underlying infection, which requires diagnosis and treatment to facilitate management of this medical emergency. The mortality rate from thyroid storm is reportedly between 10% and 75% (169). Treatment of thyroid storm consists of beta-blockers, thioamides, iodine, iodinated contrast agents, and corticosteroids (151). Aspirin should not be given for fever in the patient with thyroid storm because it may interfere with the protein binding of T4 and T3, resulting in increased free serum concentrations (151). The incidence of hypothyroidism is approximately 1% in the adult population, and 5% in adults older than 50 years (154). In women older than 60 years, the incidence of hypothyroidism may approach 6% (168). Hypothyroidism is 10 times more common in women than in men (154). Many such cases are secondary to previous antithyroid therapy (radioactive iodine or thyroidectomy) for hyperthyroidism. The most common primary cause of hypothyroidism is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an autoimmune condition (154). A history of lethargy, cold intolerance, lassitude, weight gain, ﬂuid retention, constipation, dry skin, hoarseness, periorbital edema, and brittle hair can be indicative of inadequate thyroid function. In this setting, physical findings of increased relaxation phase of deep tendon reﬂexes, cardiomegaly, pleural or pericardial effusions, or peripheral edema should stimulate further investigation of thyroid function by assessment of TSH and free T4 levels. Hypothyroidism decreases cardiac output by 30% to 50% as a result of decreased stroke volume and heart rate (171). Hyponatremia may be associated with hypothyroidism because of the inability of the kidneys to excrete water (171). When elective surgery is planned for severely hypothyroid patients, surgery should be postponed until thyroid replacement therapy is initiated (154).
The uncombined T4 level may be normal or minimally increased; T3 is often elevated to a greater degree than T4. Thyroid scan shows heterogeneous uptake with multiple regions of increased and decreased uptake; 24-h uptake of radioiodine may not be increased but is usually in the upper normal range. Prior to definitive treatment of the hyperthyroidism, ultrasound imaging should be performed to assess the presence of discrete nodules corresponding to areas of decreased uptake (“cold” nodules). If present, FNA may be indicated based on sonographic features and size cutoffs. The cytology results, if indeterminate or suspicious, may direct the therapy to surgery. Antithyroid drugs normalize thyroid function and are particularly useful in the elderly or ill patients with limited lifespan. In contrast to Graves’ disease, spontaneous remission does not occur and so treatment is long-term. Radioiodine is generally the treatment of choice; it treats areas of autonomy as well as decreasing the mass of the goiter. Sometimes, however, a degree of autonomy remains, presumably because multiple autonomous regions emerge as soon as others are treated, and further radioiodine treatment may be necessary. Surgery provides definitive treatment of underlying thyrotoxicosis as well as goiter. Patients should be rendered euthyroid using an antithyroid drug before operation. A solitary, autonomously functioning thyroid nodule is referred to as toxic adenoma. The pathogenesis of this disorder has been unraveled by demonstrating the functional effects of mutations that stimulate the TSH-R signaling pathway. Most patients with solitary hyperfunctioning nodules have acquired somatic, activating mutations in the TSH-R (Fig. 405-11).
History of a preceding upper respiratory tract infection often can be elicited. The gland is enlarged, exquisitely ten-der, and firm. The disorder classically progresses through four stages. An initial hyperthyroid phase, due to release of thyroid hormone, is followed by a second, euthyroid phase. The third phase, hypothyroidism, occurs in about 20% to 30% of patients and is followed by resolution and return to the euthyroid state in >90% of patients. A few patients develop recurrent disease.In the early stages of the disease, TSH is decreased, and Tg, T4, and T3 levels are elevated due to the release of pre-formed thyroid hormone from destroyed follicles. The erythro-cyte sedimentation rate is typically >100 mm/h. RAIU also is decreased (<2% at 24 hours), even in euthyroid patients, due to the release of thyroid hormones from destruction of the thyroid parenchyma. Painful thyroiditis is self-limited, and therefore, treatment is primarily symptomatic. Aspirin and other nonste-roidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used for pain relief, but ste-roids may be indicated in more severe cases. Short-term thyroid replacement may be needed and may shorten the duration of symptoms. Thyroidectomy is reserved for the rare patient who has a prolonged course not responsive to medical measures or for recurrent disease.Painless thyroiditis is considered to be autoimmune in ori-gin and may occur sporadically or in the postpartum period; the latter typically occurs at about 6 weeks after delivery in women with high TPO antibody titers in early pregnancy. This timing is thought to coincide with a decrease in the normal immune tolerance of pregnancy and consequent rebound elevation of antibody titers.Painless thyroiditis also is more common in women and usually occurs between 30 and 60 years of age. Physical exami-nation demonstrates a normal sized or minimally enlarged, slightly firm, nontender gland. Laboratory tests and RAIU are similar to those in painful thyroiditis, except for a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
A family history of renal failure is often present in hereditary nephritis, and patients with thin basement membrane disease often have family members with microscopic hematuria. A renal biopsy is needed for the definitive diagnosis of these disorders, which are discussed in more detail in Chap. 338. Hematuria with dysmorphic RBCs, RBC casts, and protein excretion >500 mg/d is virtually diagnostic of glomerulonephritis. RBC casts form as RBCs that enter the tubule fluid and become trapped in a cylindrical mold of gelled Tamm-Horsfall protein. Even in the absence of azotemia, these patients should undergo serologic evaluation and renal biopsy as outlined in Fig. 61-2. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Isolated pyuria is unusual since inflammatory reactions in the kidney or collecting system also are associated with hematuria. The presence of bacteria suggests infection, and WBC casts with bacteria are indicative of pyelonephritis. WBCs and/or WBC casts also may be seen in acute glomerulonephritis as well as in tubulointerstitial processes such as interstitial nephritis and transplant rejection. Casts can be seen in chronic renal diseases. Degenerated cellular casts called waxy casts or broad casts (arising in the dilated tubules that have undergone compensatory hypertrophy in response to reduced renal mass) may be seen in the urine. By history, it is often difficult for patients to distinguish urinary frequency (often of small volumes) from true polyuria (>3 L/d), and a quantification of volume by 24-h urine collection may be needed (Fig. 61-4). Polyuria results from two potential mechanisms: excretion of nonabsorbable solutes (such as glucose) or excretion of water (usually from a defect in ADH production or renal responsiveness).
Similarly the dissection can impair blood flow to the kidneys, which decreases their ability to function. The patient underwent emergency surgery and survived. Interestingly, the height of the patient and the previous lens surgery would suggest a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome, and a series of blood tests and review of the family history revealed this was so. A 35-year-old male patient presented to his family practitioner because of recent weight loss (14 lb over the previous 2 months). He also complained of a cough with streaks of blood in the sputum (hemoptysis) and left-sided chest pain. Recently, he noticed significant sweating, especially at night, which necessitated changing his sheets. On examination the patient had a low-grade temperature and was tachypneic (breathing fast). There was reduced expansion of the left side of the chest. When the chest was percussed it was noted that the anterior aspect of the left chest was dull, compared to the resonant percussion note of the remainder of the chest. Auscultation (listening with a stethoscope) revealed decreased breath sounds, which were hoarse in nature (bronchial breathing). A diagnosis of chest infection was made. Chest infection is a common disease. In most patients the infection affects the large airways and bronchi. If the infection continues, exudates and transudates are produced, filling the alveoli and the secondary pulmonary lobules. The diffuse patchy nature of this type of infection is termed bronchial pneumonia.
Hypercholesterolemia may be severe and results from increased hepatic lipoprotein synthesis. Loss of immunoglobulins contributes to an increased risk of infection. Many diseases (some listed in Fig. 61-3) and drugs can cause the nephrotic syndrome; a complete list is found in Chap. 338. HEMATuRIA, PYuRIA, AND CASTS

Isolated hematuria without proteinuria, other cells, or casts is often indicative of bleeding from the urinary tract. Hematuria is defined as two to five RBCs per high-power field (HPF) and can be detected by dipstick. A false-positive dipstick for hematuria (where no RBCs are seen on urine microscopy) may occur when myoglobinuria is present, often in the setting of rhabdomyolysis. Common causes of isolated hematuria include stones, neoplasms, tuberculosis, trauma, and prostatitis. Gross hematuria with blood clots usually is not an intrinsic renal process; rather, it suggests a postrenal source in the urinary collecting system. Evaluation of patients presenting with microscopic hematuria is outlined in Fig. 61-2. A single urinalysis with hematuria is common and can result from menstruation, viral illness, allergy, exercise, or mild trauma. Persistent or significant hematuria (>3 RBCs/ HPF on three urinalyses, a single urinalysis with >100 RBCs, or gross hematuria) is associated with significant renal or urologic lesions in 9.1% of cases. The level of suspicion for urogenital neoplasms in patients with isolated painless hematuria and nondysmorphic RBCs increases with age.
Transfusion of red blood cells (RBCs), platelets, plasma,cryoprecipitate, and granulocytes can be life-saving orlife-maintaining (Table 152-1). Whole blood is rarely indicated and is most useful to provide both oxygen-carryingcapacity and functional procoagulant and anticoagulant factors. Otherwise, packed RBCs are used to treat anemia to increase oxygen-carrying capacity. RBC transfusions shouldnot be used to treat asymptomatic nutritional deficienciesthat can be corrected by administering the appropriate deficient nutrient (iron or folic acid). Blood component therapy requires proper anticoagulation of the component unit, screening for infectious agents and blood group compatibility testing before administration. Typical transfusion reactions are listed in Table 152-2. Transfusion may also result in circulatory overload, especially in the presence of cardiopulmonary deficiency. Filtering of blood products to remove white blood cells (WBCs) may prevent febrile reactions. Long-term complications of transfusions bleeding 50,000/μL 30,000-50,000/μL

Cryoprecipitate Fibrinogen, factor 8, Hypofibrinogenemia, factor 1 unit/5-10 kg ↑ Fibrinogen by 50–100 mg/dL vWF, factor 13 13 deficiency

Recombinant factor Units as labeled Hemophilic bleeding or F8: 20–50 units/kg F8: ↑ 2%/unit/kg concentrates prophylaxis F9: 40–120 units/kg F9: ↑ 0.7 unit/kg

Hgb, Hemoglobin; RBCs, red blood cells; vWF, von Willebrand factor. Acute hemolytic transfusion Acute shock, back pain, flushing, early fever, 1. Stop transfusion; return blood to bank with reaction (incidence of 1:250,000 to intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinemia, fresh sample of patient’s blood 1:1,000,000) hemoglobinuria (may be delayed 5–10 days and 2. Hydrate intravenously*; support blood less severe if anamnestic response is present) pressure, maintain high urine flow, alkalinize urine 3. Check for and correct electrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalemia)

Allergic transfusion reaction (incidence of 1:100)

Urticaria, pruritus, maculopapular rash, edema, respiratory distress, hypotension during or within 4 hours of transfusion; often because recipient has preformed antibodies against donor antigens, occasionally from passive infusion of antibodies from atopic donor Diphenhydramine ± hydrocortisone for acute management For future transfusions consider: 1. Pretreatment with diphenhydramine ± hydrocortisone 2. Volume reduction to reduce donor plasma 3.
Glomerulonephritis with deafness. Glomerulonephritis with hemoptysis. Presence of red cell casts in urine sediment. Eosinophils in urine sediment. Waxy casts in urine sediment and Maltese crosses (seen with lipiduria). Drowsiness, asterixis, nausea, and a pericardial friction rub. A 55-year-old man is diagnosed with prostate cancer. Treatment options? Low urine specific gravity in the presence of high serum osmolality. Treatment of SIADH? Hematuria, ﬂank pain, and palpable ﬂank mass. Testicular cancer associated with β-hCG, AFP. The most common type of testicular cancer. The most common histology of bladder cancer. Complication of overly rapid correction of hyponatremia.
High-dose ASA (for inﬂammation and fever) and IVIG (to prevent aneurysms). Low-dose ASA is then continued, usually for six weeks. Children who develop coronary aneurysms may require chronic anticoagulation with ASA or other antiplatelet medications. Corticosteroids may be used in IVIG-refractory cases, but routine use is not recommended. Referral to a pediatric cardiologist and routine follow-up echocardiograms to assess for progression of coronary artery aneurysms are important parts of ongoing management. An autoimmune disorder manifesting as arthritis with “morning stiffness” and gradual loss of motion that is present for at least six weeks in a patient < 16 years of age. Formerly known as juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). Pauciarticular (oligoarthritis): Most common; four or fewer joints are involved (usually weight-bearing); usually ANA and RF . Involves young females; uveitis is common and requires slit-lamp exam for evaluation. No systemic symptoms. Polyarthritis: Involves five or more joints; symmetric. RF positivity is rare and indicates severe disease; younger children may be ANA  with milder disease. Systemic symptoms are rare. Systemic-onset (Still’s disease): May present with recurrent high fever (usually > 39°C), hepatosplenomegaly, and a salmon-colored macular rash; usually RF and ANA . NSAIDs and strengthening exercises.
The vast majority of patients have advanced disease at the time of presentation, and unlike Wilms’ tumor, in which cure is expected in the vast majority of patients, the overall survival of patients with neuroblastoma is significantly lower. Over 80% of cases present before the age of 4 years, and the peak incidence is two years of age. Neuro-blastomas arise from the neural crest cells and show different levels of differentiation. The tumor originates most frequently in the adrenal glands, posterior mediastinum, neck, or pelvis but can arise in any sympathetic ganglion. The clinical presen-tation depends on the site of the primary and the presence of metastases.9Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174812/02/19   11:27 AM 1749PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Two-thirds of these tumors are first noted as an asymp-tomatic abdominal mass. The tumor may cross the midline, and a majority of patients will already show signs of metastatic disease. Occasionally, children may experience pain from the tumor mass or from bony metastases. Proptosis and perior-bital ecchymosis may occur due to the presence of retrobulbar metastasis. Because they originate in paraspinal ganglia, neuro-blastomas may invade through neural foramina and compress the spinal cord, causing muscle weakness or sensory changes. Rarely, children may have severe watery diarrhea due to the secretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide by the tumor, or with paraneoplastic neurologic findings including cerebellar ataxia or opsoclonus/myoclonus. The International Neuroblastoma Stag-ing System and the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group Staging System are provided in Table 39-3.Diagnostic Evaluation. Since these tumors derive from the sympathetic nervous system, catecholamines and their metabo-lites will be produced at increased levels. These include elevated levels of serum catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine) or urine catecholamine metabolites: vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) or homovanillic acid (HVA). Measurement of VMA and HVMA in serum and urine aids in the diagnosis and in monitoring ade-quacy of future treatment and recurrence. The minimum criterion for a diagnosis of neuroblastoma is based on one of the following: (a) an unequivocal pathologic diagnosis made from tumor tissue by light microscopy (with or without immunohistology, electron microscopy, or increased levels of serum catecholamines or uri-nary catecholamine metabolites); (b) the combination of bone marrow aspirate or biopsy containing unequivocal tumor cells and increased levels of serum catecholamines or urinary catechol-amine metabolites as described earlier.The patient should be evaluated by abdominal computer-ized tomography, which may show displacement and occasion-ally obstruction of the ureter of an intact kidney (Fig.
This testing is best carried out by employing urinary steroid metabolite profiling by β Blockers ↓↑ ↑ gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). An increased free α1 Blockers →→ → cortisol over free cortisone ratio is suggestive of SAME and can be treated with dexamethasone. Steroid profiling by GC/MS also detects the steroids associated with CYP11B1 and CYP17A1 deficiency or the carcinoma (Fig. 406-12). If the GC/MS profile is normal, then Liddle’s syndrome should be considered. It is very sensitive to amiloride treat-Diuretics (↑)(↑) →/(↓) ment but will not respond to MR antagonist treatment, because the Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; AT1R, angiotensin II receptor type 1. defect is due to a constitutively active ENaC. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT: INCIDENTALLY DISCOVERED ADRENAL MASS Epidemiology Incidentally discovered adrenal masses, commonly termed adrenal “incidentalomas,” are common, with a prevalence of at least 2% in the general population as documented in CT and autopsy series. The prevalence increases with age, with 1% of 40-year-olds and 7% of 70-year-olds harboring an adrenal mass. Etiology Most solitary adrenal tumors are monoclonal neoplasms. Several genetic syndromes, including MEN 1 (MEN1), MEN 2 (RET), Carney’s complex (PRKAR1A), and McCune-Albright (GNAS1), can have adrenal tumors as one of their features. Somatic mutations in MEN1, GNAS1, and PRKAR1A have been identified in a small proportion of sporadic adrenocortical adenomas. Aberrant expression of membrane receptors (gastric inhibitory peptide, αand β-adrenergic, luteinizing hormone, vasopressin V1, and interleukin 1 receptors) have been identified in some sporadic cases of macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia. The majority of adrenal nodules are endocrine-inactive adrenocortical adenomas. However, larger series suggest that up to 25% of adrenal nodules are hormonally active, due to a cortisolor aldosteroneproducing adrenocortical adenoma or a pheochromocytoma associated with catecholamine excess (Table 406-5). Adrenocortical carcinoma is rare but is the cause of an adrenal mass in 5% of patients.
Measurement of VMA and HVMA in serum and urine aids in the diagnosis and in monitoring ade-quacy of future treatment and recurrence. The minimum criterion for a diagnosis of neuroblastoma is based on one of the following: (a) an unequivocal pathologic diagnosis made from tumor tissue by light microscopy (with or without immunohistology, electron microscopy, or increased levels of serum catecholamines or uri-nary catecholamine metabolites); (b) the combination of bone marrow aspirate or biopsy containing unequivocal tumor cells and increased levels of serum catecholamines or urinary catechol-amine metabolites as described earlier.The patient should be evaluated by abdominal computer-ized tomography, which may show displacement and occasion-ally obstruction of the ureter of an intact kidney (Fig. 39-38). Prior to the institution of therapy, a complete staging workup should be performed. This includes radiograph of the chest, bone marrow biopsy, and radionuclide scans to search for metastases. Any abnormality on chest X-ray should be followed up with CT of the chest.Prognostic Indicators. A number of biologic variables have been studied in children with neuroblastoma. An open biopsy is required in order to provide tissue for this analysis. Hyperdip-loid tumor DNA is associated with a favorable prognosis, and Figure 39-38. Abdominal neuroblastoma arising from the right retroperitoneum (arrow).N-myc amplification is associated with a poor prognosis regard-less of patient age. The Shimada classification describes tumors as either favorable or unfavorable histology based on the degree of differentiation, the mitosis-karyorrhexis index, and the pres-ence or absence of schwannian stroma. In general, children of any age with localized neuroblastoma and infants younger than 1 year of age with advanced disease and favorable disease char-acteristics have a high likelihood of disease-free survival. By contrast, older children with advanced-stage disease have a sig-nificantly decreased chance for cure despite intensive therapy. For example, aggressive multiagent chemotherapy has resulted in a 2-year survival rate of approximately 20% in older children with stage IV disease. Neuroblastoma in the adolescent has a worse long-term prognosis regardless of stage or site and, in many cases, a more prolonged course.Surgery.
Smell can be assessed in verbal, cooperative children older than2 years of age. Aromatic substances (perfumes, vanilla) shouldbe used instead of volatile substances (ammonia), which irritate the nasal mucosa and stimulate the trigeminal nerve. Full-term newborns in a quiet awake state follow human faces,lights in a dark room, or large, opticokinetic strips. Visual acuity has been estimated to be 20/200 in newborns and 20/20 in6-month-old infants. Standard visual charts displaying picturesinstead of letters can be used to assess visual acuity in toddlers.Peripheral vision is tested by surreptitiously bringing objectsinto the visual field from behind. A reduced pupillary reactionto light suggests anterior visual pathway lesions, including theretina, optic nerves, and chiasm. Unilateral optic nerve lesionsare identified by the swinging flashlight test. With an optic nerveabnormality, both pupils constrict when light is directed into thenormal eye. When light is swung over to the abnormal eye, bothpupils dilate inappropriately; this is called an afferent pupillary defect or Marcus Gunn pupil. Interruption of the sympatheticinnervation to the pupil produces Horner’s syndrome (ptosis,miosis, and unilateral facial anhidrosis). In this instance, anisocoria (unequal pupils) is more pronounced in a dark room,because the affected pupil is unable to dilate appropriately.Lesions of the posterior visual pathway, including the lateralgeniculate, optic radiations, and occipital cortex, have normalpupillary light reactions but are expressed by loss of visual fields. Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI

These three cranial nerves control eye movement and are most easily examined with the use of a colorful toy to capture the child’s attention. For infants too young to fix and follow, rotating the infant’s head assesses oculocephalic vestibular reflexes (doll’s eye maneuver). If the brainstem is intact, rotating a newborn or comatose patient’s head to the right causes the eyes to move to the left, and vice versa. In awake, older patients, voluntary eye movements mask the reflex.
A wide variety of medications and abused substances are known to precipitate seizures as well (Table 445-5). Focal seizure activity can begin in a very discrete region of cortex and then slowly invade the surrounding regions. The hallmark of an established seizure is typically an electrographic “spike” due to intense near-simultaneous firing of a large number of local excitatory neurons, resulting in an apparent hypersynchronization of the excitatory bursts across a relatively large cortical region. The bursting activity in individual neurons (the “paroxysmal depolarization shift”) is caused by a relatively long-lasting depolarization of the neuronal membrane due to influx of extracellular calcium (Ca2+), which leads to the opening of voltage-dependent sodium (Na+) channels, influx of Na+, and generation of repetitive action potentials. This is followed by a hyper-polarizing afterpotential mediated by γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors or potassium (K+) channels, depending on the cell type. The synchronized bursts from a sufficient number of neurons result in a so-called spike discharge on the EEG. The spreading seizure wavefront is slowed and ultimately halted by intact hyperpolarization and a “surround” inhibition created by feed-forward activation of inhibitory neurons. With sufficient activation, there is a recruitment of surrounding neurons via a number of synaptic and nonsynaptic mechanisms, including: (1) an increase in extracellular K+, which blunts hyperpolarization and depolarizes neighboring neurons; (2) accumulation of Ca2+ in presynaptic terminals, leading to enhanced neurotransmitter release; (3) depolarization-induced

Alkylating agents (e.g., busulfan, chlorambucil)

Antimalarials (chloroquine, mefloquine)

Cyclosporine OKT3 (monoclonal antibodies to T cells) Tacrolimus Interferons

Antidepressants (e.g., bupropion) Antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine) Lithium

Drugs of abuse aIn benzodiazepine-dependent patients. activation of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the excitatory amino acid receptor, which causes additional Ca2+ influx and neuronal activation; and (4) ephaptic interactions related to changes in tissue osmolarity and cell swelling. The recruitment of a sufficient number of neurons leads to the propagation of excitatory currents into contiguous areas via local cortical connections and to more distant areas via long commissural pathways such as the corpus callosum. Many factors control neuronal excitability, and thus there are many potential mechanisms for altering a neuron’s propensity to have bursting activity. Mechanisms intrinsic to the neuron include changes in the conductance of ion channels, response characteristics of membrane receptors, cytoplasmic buffering, second-messenger systems, and protein expression as determined by gene transcription, translation, and posttranslational modification. Mechanisms extrinsic to the neuron include changes in the amount or type of neurotransmitters present at the synapse, modulation of receptors by extracellular ions and other molecules, and temporal and spatial properties of synaptic and nonsynaptic input. Nonneural cells, such as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, have an important role in many of these mechanisms as well. Certain recognized causes of seizures are explained by these mechanisms.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Intravenous access would be obtained and used to administer dextrose and thiamine, as well as elec-trolytes and vitamins. If a young, previously healthy individual receives medical care in time, supportive care will most likely be highly effective. As the patient recovers, it is important to be vigilant for signs and symptoms of the alcohol withdrawal syndrome. (For a case involving chronic alcoholism and withdrawal management, see Nejad SH et al: Case 39-2012: A 55-year old man with alcoholism, recurrent seizures, and agitation. N Engl J Med 2012;367:2428.) Roger J. Porter, MD, & Michael A. Rogawski, MD, PhD was unchanged, and levetiracetam was gradually increased to 1000 mg bid. The patient had no significant adverse effects from this dosage. At age 21, she had a second tonic-clonic seizure while in college; further discussion with her room-mate at that time revealed a history of two recent episodes of 1–2 minutes of altered consciousness with lip smacking (focal impaired awareness seizure, formerly complex partial seizure). A repeat EEG showed occasional right temporal spikes. What is one possible strategy for controlling her present symptoms? A 23-year-old woman presents to the office for consultation regarding her antiseizure medications. Seven years ago, this otherwise healthy young woman had a tonic-clonic seizure at home. She was rushed to the emergency department, at which time she was alert but complained of headache. A consulting neurologist placed her on levetiracetam, 500 mg bid. Four days later, electroencephalography (EEG) showed rare right temporal sharp waves.
Neuropsychobiology 1998;38:119. Lamotrigine was gradually added to the regimen to a dosage of 200 mg bid. Since then, the patient has been seizure-free for almost 2 years but now comes to the office for a medi-cation review. Gradual discontinuation of levetiracetam is planned if the patient continues to do well for another year, although risk of recurrent seizures is always present when medications are withdrawn. Helge Eilers, MD, & Spencer Yost, MD

An elderly man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and ischemic pain in the lower extremity is scheduled for femoral-to-popliteal artery bypass surgery. He has a history of hyper-tension and coronary artery disease with symptoms of stable angina. He can walk only half a block before pain in his legs forces him to stop. He has a 50-pack-year smoking history but stopped 2 years ago. Medications include atenolol, atorvastatin, and hydrochlorothiazide. The nurse in the preoperative holding area obtains the following vital signs: temperature 36.8°C (98.2°F), blood pressure 168/100 mm Hg, heart rate 78 bpm, oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter 96% while breathing room air, and pain 5/10 in the right lower leg after walking into the hospital. What anesthetic agents will you choose for his anesthetic plan? Why? Does the choice of anesthetic make a difference? For centuries, humans relied on natural medicines and physical methods to control surgical pain. Historical texts describe the sedative effects of cannabis, henbane, mandrake, and opium poppy.
Preventative medications include tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, nortriptyline), anticonvulsants (topiramate, valproic acid),antihistamines (cyproheptadine), beta-blockers (propranolol), and calcium channel blockers (flunarizine, verapamil). Before initiating daily medications, lifestyle modifications must be put into place to regulate sleep, daily routines, and exercise and identify any precipitating or aggravating influences, eliminating as many as possible (caffeine, certain foods, stress, missed meals, dehydration). Other adjunctive treatment options include psychological support, counseling, stress management, and biofeedback. A seizure is a transient occurrence of signs or symptoms resulting from abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Migraine and variants Paroxysmal torticollis of infancy Paroxysmal vertigo (benign)

Syncope Vasovagal syncope Breath-holding spells Cardiac syncope (arrhythmias, long QT syndrome) Apnea

Metabolic disorders Hypoglycemia Inborn errors of metabolism

Sleep disorders Narcolepsy, cataplexy Night terrors

The differential diagnosis of paroxysmal disorders includes seizures and nonepileptic events (Table 181-1). Nonseizure paroxysmal events are often normal or benign phenomena, although some are clinically significant and consequential. A thorough medical history from the patient and primary witnesses is the most reliable tool for establishing the correct diagnosis. Acute symptomatic seizures are secondary to an acute problem affecting brain excitability, such as electrolyte imbalance or infection (Table 181-2). Epilepsy is defined as recurrent, unprovoked seizures. Epileptic seizures are generally classified as focal (or partial), arising from one region of the cortex, or generalized seizures, which arise from both hemispheres, simultaneously (Table 181-3). Approximately 4% to 10% of children experience at least one seizure. The incidence of childhood epilepsy is 1% to 2%. Simple focal (or partial) seizures arise from a specific anatomic focus and may or may not spread to surrounding brain regions. Clinical symptoms include motor (tonic, clonic, myoclonic), sensory, psychic, or autonomic abnormalities, but consciousness is preserved. The location and direction of spread of the seizure focus determine the clinical symptoms.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Mülges W, Babin-Ebel J, Reents W, Toyka KV: Cognitive performance after coronary bypass grafting: A follow-up study. Neurology 59:741, 2002. Myers RE, Yamaguchi S: Nervous system effects of cardiac arrest in monkeys. Arch Neurol 34:65, 1977. Nakajima K: Clinicopathological study of pontine hemorrhage. Stroke 14:485, 1983. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group: Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 333:1581, 1995. Nikolaev SI, Vetiska S, Bonilla X, et al: Somatic activating KRAS mutations in arteriovenous malformations of the brain. N Engl J Med 378:250, 2018. Nishimoto A, Takeuchi S: Moyamoya disease. In: Vinken PJ,

Bruyn GW (eds): Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol 12. Vascular Diseases of the Nervous System. Part 2.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
In the following discussion, we use “tPA” to represent all tissue plasminogen activators. The benchmark study organized by the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (see the NINCDS and Stroke rtPA Stroke Study Group in the references) provided evidence of benefit from intravenous tPA. Treatment within 3 h of the onset of symptoms led to a 30 percent increase in the number of patients who remained with little or no neurologic deficit when examined 3 months after the stroke; this benefit persisted when assessed 1 year later in the study by Kwiatkowski and associates. Two aspects are notable: the benefits extended to all types of ischemic strokes, including those caused by occlusion of small vessels (lacunes), and improvement was not apparent in the days immediately following treatment, only when patients were examined at 3 months. We make a comment here about the historically important, seminal NIH study, in which tPA was administered in a dose of 0.9 mg/kg, 10 percent of which was given as an initial bolus, followed by an infusion of the remainder over 1 h. A dose of 90 mg was not exceeded, this being lower than the dose used for myocardial infarction. The relative improvement in neurologic state came at the expense of a 6 percent risk of symptomatic cerebral hemorrhage and 4 percent of insignificant hemorrhages seen on imaging, that is, a lower rate than in most previous studies but twice the expected rate without thrombolysis (some of the hemorrhages were into the area of infarction and did not cause symptomatic worsening). Patients were excluded from the study if they had massive infarctions (encompassing more than two-thirds of the territory of the middle cerebral artery), had high scores on a clinical stroke scale that was devised for the National Institutes of Health (NIH) study (available at: http://www.ninds .nih.gov/doctors/NIH_Stroke_Scale.pdf and from other sources) had uncontrolled hypertension, were more than 80 years of age, or had recently received anticoagulants (except aspirin). Further analysis of the NINCDS trial revealed that patients who were treated earliest within the 3-h time frame had more benefit than those treated later; indeed, the administration of tPA in the time between 2.5 and 3 h after the stroke was of less value. One trial has suggested that a lower dose of tPA (0.6 mg/kg) is non-inferior to the standard dose in a population of predominantly Asian patients (Anderson et al 2016). For tenecteplase, doses of 0.25 mg/kg or 0.4 mg/kg have been used for thrombolysis and achieved comparable results. The trial reported by Logallo comparing tenecteplase at the higher dose to alteplase showed no difference between groups in clinical outcomes but other trials, such as the one by Parsons et al and by Campbell et al showed an improved rate of revascularization before thrombectomy, in the latter of 22% compared to 10% with alteplase using a lower dose of 0.25 mg/kg. Attempts to establish that patients with a longer duration of ischemic symptoms benefit from thrombolysis by tPA have varied in success but have favored an effect up to 4.5 h as noted below. In some patients with basilar artery occlusion and coma of brief duration and those without extensive thrombosis, prompt tPA treatment has at times also resulted in an overall improvement in neurologic function, but there were numerous exceptions. Adapted from guidelines issued by the American Heart Association are the generally agreed upon inclusion and exclusion criteria for the use of intravenous tPA as shown in Table 33-6. Intracranial and systemic bleeding is, of course, the great concern and a minor but interesting point is that some patients, who had been receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for the treatment of hypertension, seem to display angioneurotic edema as a side effect of tPA.
Patients with end-stage liver disease have decreased ability to synthesize clotting proteins. They show prolonged PT and aPTT. 5.7. Which one of the following can be ruled out in a patient with thrombophilia? A. A deficiency of antithrombin III

B. A deficiency of FIX

C. A deficiency of protein C

D. An excess of prothrombin

E. Expression of FV Leiden

Correct answer = B. Symptomatic deficiencies in clotting factors will present with a decreased ability to clot (coagulopathy). Thrombophilia, however, is characterized by an increased tendency to clot. Choices A, C, D, and E result in thrombophilia. 5.8. Current guidelines for the treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke (a stroke caused by a blood clot obstructing a vessel that supplies blood to the brain) include the recommendation that tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) be used shortly after the onset of symptoms. The basis of the recommendation for TPA is that it activates:

A. antithrombin III. B. the activated protein C complex. C. the receptor for von Willebrand factor. D. the serine protease that degrades fibrin.
Craniotomy wound infections are a special concern because performing a craniotomy creates a devascularized free bone flap susceptible to infection and not penetrated by antibiotics. These wounds must be debrided and the bone flaps removed and discarded. Subsequent care involves appropriate antibiotic therapy, observation for signs of recurrent infection off antibiotics, and return to the OR for titanium or methylmethacrylate cranioplasty 6 to 12 months later.Subdural Empyema. Subdural empyema is a rapidly progres-sive pyogenic infection. The subdural space lacks significant barriers to the spread of the infection, such as compartmental-ization or septations. Subdural empyemas usually occur over the cerebral convexities. Potential infectious sources include sinus disease, penetrating trauma, and otitis. Streptococci and staphylococci are the most frequent sources. Presenting symp-toms include fever, headache, neck stiffness, seizures, or focal neurologic deficit. Neurologic deficit results from inflammation of cortical blood vessels, leading to thrombosis and stroke. The most common deficit is contralateral hemiparesis. Patients with suggestive symptoms should undergo rapid contrast CT scan. LP frequently fails to yield the offending organism and risks herniation due to mass effect. Typical treatment is wide hemi-craniectomy, dural opening, and lavage. The pus may be thick or septated, making burr hole drainage or small craniotomy insufficient.
The splenectomized patient should be counseled about the risks of infection with certain organisms, such as the protozoan Babesia (Chap. 249) and Capnocytophaga canimorsus, a bacterium carried in the mouths of animals (Chaps. 167e and 183e). Because encapsulated bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis) are the organisms most commonly associated with postsplenectomy sepsis, splenectomized persons should be vaccinated (and revaccinated; Table 104-2 and Chap. 148) against the capsular polysaccharides of these organisms. Many clinicians recommend giving splenectomized patients a small supply of antibiotics effective against S. pneumoniae,

N. meningitidis, and H. influenzae to avert rapid, overwhelming sepsis in the event that they cannot present for medical attention immediately after the onset of fever or other signs or symptoms of bacterial infection. A few tablets of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (or levofloxacin if resistant strains of S. pneumoniae are prevalent locally) are a reasonable choice for this purpose. Type of Defense Specific Lesion Cells Involved Organism Cancer Association Disease

Emptying of fluid Occlusion of orifices: collections ureters, bile duct, colon Lymphatic function Node dissection Splenic clearance of Splenectomy

Phagocytosis Lack of granulocytes

Humoral immunity Lack of antibody

Cellular immunity Lack of T cells Skin epithelial cells Luminal epithelial cells

T cells and macrophages Staphylococci, streptococci

Staphylococci, streptococci

Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Babesia, Capnocytophaga canimorsus

Staphylococci, streptococci, enteric organisms, fungi

S. pneumoniae,

H. influenzae,

N. meningitidis

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Listeria, herpesviruses, fungi, intracellular parasites Head and neck, squamous cell carcinoma

Renal, ovarian, biliary tree, metastatic diseases of many cancers

Hodgkin’s disease, leukemia

Acute myeloid and acute lymphocytic leukemias, hairy cell leukemia

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, multiple myeloma

Hodgkin’s disease, leukemia, T cell lymphoma Cellulitis, extensive skin infection

Rapid, overwhelming bacteremia; urinary tract infection

Rapid, overwhelming sepsis

Infections with encapsulated organisms, sinusitis, pneumonia

Infections with intracellular bacteria, fungi, parasites; virus reactivation a case-by-case basis following reevaluation.) aThe latest recommendations by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices and the CDC guidelines can be found at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines. bA single dose of TDaP (tetanus–diphtheria–acellular pertussis), followed by a booster dose of Td (tetanus-diphtheria) every 10 years, is recommended for adults. cLive-virus vaccine is contraindicated; inactivated vaccine should be used. dTwo types of vaccine are used to prevent pneumococcal disease. A conjugate vaccine active against 13 serotypes (13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, or PCV13) is currently administered in three separate doses to all children. A polysaccharide vaccine active against 23 serotypes (23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, or PPSV23) elicits titers of antibody lower than those achieved with the conjugate vaccine, and immunity may wane more rapidly. Because the ablative chemotherapy given to recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCTs) eradicates immunologic memory, revaccination is recommended for all such patients.
The transmissible agent is resistant to boiling, treatment with formalin and alcohol, and ultraviolet radiation but can be inactivated by autoclaving at 132°C (269.6°F) at 15 lb/in2 for 1 h or by immersion for 1 h in 5 percent sodium hypochlorite (bleach). Workers exposed to infected materials (butchers, abattoir workers, healthcare workers) should wash thoroughly with ordinary soap. Needles, glassware, needle electrodes, and other instruments should be handled with great care and immersed in appropriate disinfectants and autoclaved or incinerated. The performance of a brain biopsy or autopsy requires that a set of special precautions be followed, as outlined by Brown but this surgical procedure is not necessary as more diagnostic tools have become available. Obviously such patients or any others known to have been demented should not be donors of organs or corneas for transplantation or blood for transfusion. This is a rare, strongly familial disease inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. It begins insidiously in midlife and runs a chronic course (mean duration 5 years). The main characteristics are progressive cerebellar ataxia, corticospinal tract signs, dysarthria, and nystagmus. Dementia is often associated but is relatively mild. Dysesthesias and proximal weakness of the legs have been emphasized as an early feature by Arata and colleagues. Their report may be consulted for details of 11 well-studied cases. The MRI is usually normal; with progression, generalized atrophy is found. There are characteristic spongiform changes in brain tissue, as in CJD. Brain tissue from patients with this disease, when inoculated into chimpanzees, has produced a spongiform encephalopathy (Masters et al, 1981). Molecular genetic studies of affected family members demonstrate a mutation of the prion protein gene.
Med J Aust. 2012;196(9):582-586. 194. Ejstrud P, Kristensen B, Hansen JB, Madsen KM, Schonhey-der HC, Sorensen HT. Risk and patterns of bacteraemia after splenectomy: a population-based study. Scand J Infect Dis. 2000;32(5):521-525. 195. Edgren G, Almqvist R, Hartman M, Utter GH. Splenectomy and the risk of sepsis: a population-based cohort study. Ann Surg. 2014;260(6):1081-1087. 196. Leone G, Pizzigallo E. Bacterial infections following splenec-tomy for malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis.
Unfortunately, despite a careful history and physical examination as well as routine radiographic studies, the causative pathogen in a case of CAP is difficult to predict with any degree of certainty; in more than one-half of cases, a specific etiology is never determined. Nevertheless, epidemiologic and risk factors may suggest the involvement of certain pathogens (Table 153-3). More than 5 million CAP cases occur annually in the United States; usually, 80% of the affected patients are treated as outpatients and 20% as inpatients. The mortality rate among outpatients is usually ≤1%, whereas among hospitalized patients the rate can range from ∼12% to 40%, depending on whether treatment is provided in or outside of the intensive care unit (ICU). CAP results in more than 1.2 million hospitalizations and more than 55,000 deaths annually. The overall yearly cost associated with CAP is estimated at $12 billion. The incidence rates are highest at the extremes of age. The overall annual rate in the United States is 12 cases/1000 persons, but the figure increases to 12–18/1000 among children <4 years of age and to 20/1000 among persons >60 years of age. Structural lung disease (e.g., bronchiectasis)

Dementia, stroke, decreased level of consciousness

Travel to Ohio or St. Lawrence river valleys

Travel to southwestern United States

Travel to Southeast Asia

Stay in hotel or on cruise ship in previous 2 weeks Local influenza activity Exposure to bats or birds Exposure to birds

Exposure to rabbits Exposure to sheep, goats, parturient cats

Streptococcus pneumoniae, oral anaerobes, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp., Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Haemophilus influenzae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Legionella spp., S. pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Chlamydia pneumoniae

P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia, Staphylococcus aureus

Oral anaerobes, gram-negative enteric bacteria

CA-MRSA, oral anaerobes, endemic fungi,

M. tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria Histoplasma capsulatum

Hantavirus, Coccidioides spp. Burkholderia pseudomallei, avian influenza virus

Legionella spp. Influenza virus, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus

H. capsulatum Chlamydia psittaci Francisella tularensis Coxiella burnetii

Abbreviations: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The risk factors for CAP in general and for pneumococcal pneu-805 monia in particular have implications for treatment regimens. Risk factors for CAP include alcoholism, asthma, immunosuppression, institutionalization, and an age of ≥70 years. In the elderly, factors such as decreased cough and gag reflexes as well as reduced antibody and Toll-like receptor responses increase the likelihood of pneumonia. Risk factors for pneumococcal pneumonia include dementia, seizure disorders, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, alcoholism, tobacco smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and HIV infection.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Accurate characterization of cardiac murmurs provides important insight into the natural history of many valvular and congenital heart lesions. Finally, the important role played by the physical examination in enhancing the clinician-patient relationship cannot be overestimated. THE GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Any examination begins with an assessment of the general appear-ance of the patient, with notation of age, posture, demeanor, and 267 SEC Tion 2 DiAgnoSiS oF CARDiovASCulAR DiSoRDERS overall health status. Is the patient in pain or resting quietly, dyspneic or diaphoretic? Does the patient choose to avoid certain body positions to reduce or eliminate pain, as might be the case with suspected acute pericarditis? Are there clues indicating that dyspnea may have a pulmonary cause, such as a barrel chest deformity with an increased anterior-posterior diameter, tachypnea, and pursed-lip breathing? Skin pallor, cyanosis, and jaundice can be appreciated readily and provide additional clues. A chronically ill-appearing emaciated patient may suggest the presence of long-standing heart failure or another systemic disorder, such as a malignancy. Various genetic syndromes, often with cardiovascular involvement, can also be recognized easily, such as trisomy 21, Marfan’s syndrome, and Holt-Oram syndrome. Height and weight should be measured routinely, and both body mass index and body surface area should be calculated. Knowledge of the waist circumference and the waist-to-hip ratio can be used to predict long-term cardiovascular risk. Mental status, level of alertness, and mood should be assessed continuously during the interview and examination. Skin Central cyanosis occurs with significant right-to-left shunting at the level of the heart or lungs, allowing deoxygenated blood to reach the systemic circulation. Peripheral cyanosis or acrocyanosis, in contrast, is usually related to reduced extremity blood flow due to small vessel constriction, as seen in patients with severe heart failure, shock, or peripheral vascular disease; it can be aggravated by the use of β-adrenergic blockers with unopposed α-mediated constriction. Differential cyanosis refers to isolated cyanosis affecting the lower but not the upper extremities in a patient with a large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and secondary pulmonary hypertension with right-to-left to shunting at the great vessel level.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;29:947. Zesiewicz TA et al: Update on treatment of essential tremor. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2013;15:410. The history is suggestive of parkinsonism, but the incon-spicuous tremor and early cognitive changes raise the possi-bility of atypical parkinsonism rather than classic Parkinson’s disease. The prognosis of these disorders is worse than that of classic Parkinson’s disease. Given the cognitive changes and his age, the use of a dopamine agonist was unwise, as these agents are more likely than levodopa to exacerbate or precipitate behavioral and cognitive disturbances. Sleep attacks may occur spontaneously but are especially noted in patients receiving dopamine agonists. The patient has also developed punding, which is a recognized adverse effect of dopaminergic medication. Surgical treatment (deep brain stimulation) is contraindicated in patients with cognitive changes or atypical parkinsonism. Charles DeBattista, MD * severe akathisia. Although more costly, lurasidone is then prescribed, which, over the course of several weeks of treatment, improves his symptoms and is tolerated by the patient. What signs and symptoms would support an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia? In the treatment of schizophre-nia, what benefits do the second-generation antipsychotic drugs offer over the traditional agents such as haloperidol? In addition to the management of schizophrenia, what other clinical indications warrant consideration of the use of drugs nominally classified as antipsychotics? A 19-year-old male student is brought into the clinic by his mother who has been concerned about her son’s erratic behavior and strange beliefs.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
The usual blink rate (12 to 20/min) is reduced in the parkinsonian patient to 5 to 10/min, and with it there is a slight widening of the palpebral fissures, creating a stare. A reduction in movements of the small facial muscles imparts the characteristic expressionless “masked” appearance (hypomimia). When seated, the patient makes fewer small shifts and adjustments of position than the normal person (the above mentioned hypokinesia), and the fingers straighten and assume a flexed and adducted posture at the metacarpophalangeal joints. The characteristic tremor, which usually involves a hand, is often listed as the initial sign; but in at least half the cases observant family members will already have remarked on the patient’s relative slowness of movement. In about one-quarter of cases the tremor is mild and intermittent, or evident in only 1 finger or 1 hand. The tremor of the fully developed case takes several forms, as was remarked in Chap. 4. The approximately 4-per-second “pill-rolling” tremor of the thumb and fingers, although most characteristic, is seen in only about half the patients. It is typically present when the hand is motionless, that is not used in voluntary movement (hence the commonly used term resting tremor). Complete relaxation, however, reduces or abolishes the tremor, so that the term tremor in repose is a more accurate description. Volitional movement dampens it momentarily. The rhythmic beat coincides with an alternating burst of activity in agonist and antagonist muscles in the electromyogram (EMG) and sometimes palpable by the examiner; hence, the description alternating tremor is applied. The arm, jaw, tongue, eyelids, and foot are less often involved. Even the least degree of tremor is felt during passive movement of a rigid part (cogwheel phenomenon, or Negro sign, or at least this is the ostensible explanation for cogwheeling but there has been a dissociation of these two signs in many of our patients). The tremor shows surprising fluctuations in severity and is aggravated by walking and excitement, but its frequency remains constant (Hunker and Abbs).
In order to proceed with surgery, another technique (such as an awake fiberoptic-assisted intubation) should be used to secure the airway. Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders

Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP

A 76-year-old retired banker complains of a shuffling gait with occasional falls over the last year. He has developed a stooped posture, drags his left leg when walking, and is unsteady on turning. He remains independent in all activi-ties of daily living, but he has become more forgetful and occasionally sees his long-deceased father in his bedroom. Examination reveals hypomimia, hypophonia, a slight rest tremor of the right hand and chin, mild rigidity, and impaired rapid alternating movements in all limbs. Neuro-logic and general examinations are otherwise normal. What is the likely diagnosis and prognosis? The patient is started on a dopamine agonist, and the dose is gradually built up to the therapeutic range. Was this a good choice of medications? Six months later, the patient and his wife return for follow-up. It now becomes apparent that he is falling asleep at inappropriate times, such as at the dinner table, and when awake, he spends much of the time in arranging and rear-ranging the table cutlery or in picking at his clothes. To what is his condition due, and how should it be managed? Would you recommend surgical treatment? Several types of abnormal movement are recognized. Tremor consists of a rhythmic oscillatory movement around a joint and is best characterized by its relation to activity.
For many patients, first-generation (eg, haloperidol) and second-generation agents (eg, risperidone) are of equal efficacy for treating positive symptoms. Second generation agents are often more effective for treating negative symptoms and cogni-tive dysfunction and have lower risk of tardive dyskinesia and hyperprolactinemia. Other indications for the use of selected antipsychotics include bipolar disorder, psychotic depression, Tourette syndrome, disturbed behavior in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and in the case of older drugs (eg, chlorpromazine), treatment of emesis, and pruritus. Charles DeBattista, MD house and has no motivation, interest, or energy to pursue recreational activities that she once enjoyed such as hiking. She describes herself as “chronically miserable and worried all the time.” Her medical history is notable for chronic neck pain from a motor vehicle accident for which she is being treated with tramadol and meperidine. In addition, she is on hydrochlorothiazide and propranolol for hypertension. The patient has a history of one depressive episode after a divorce that was treated successfully with fluoxetine. Medical workup including complete blood cell count, thyroid func-tion tests, and a chemistry panel reveals no abnormalities. She is started on fluoxetine for a presumed major depressive episode and referred for cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. What CYP450 and pharmacodynamic interactions might be associated with fluoxetine use in this patient? Which class of antidepressants would be contraindicated in this patient? A 47-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a chief complaint of fatigue. She indicates that she was promoted to senior manager in her company approximately 11 months earlier. Although her promotion was welcome and came with a sizable raise in pay, it resulted in her having to move away from an office and group of colleagues she very much enjoyed. In addition, her level of responsibility increased dramatically.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
This approach helps both to detect nutritional problems and to prevent the conclusion that isolated findings indicate nutritional problems when they do not. For example, hypoalbuminemia caused by an inflammatory illness does not necessarily indicate malnutrition. NuTRITIONAl DEfICIENCy: THE HIgH-RIsK PATIENT

Underweight (body mass index <18.5) and/or recent loss of ≥10% of usual body mass

Poor intake: anorexia, food avoidance (e.g., psychiatric condition), or NPOa status for more than ~5 days

Protracted nutrient losses: malabsorption, enteric fistulas, draining abscesses or wounds, renal dialysis

Hypermetabolic states: sepsis, protracted fever, extensive trauma or burns

Alcohol abuse or use of drugs with antinutrient or catabolic properties: glucocorticoids, antimetabolites (e.g., methotrexate), immunosuppressants, antitumor agents

Impoverishment, isolation, advanced age aNil per os (nothing by mouth). Nutritional History Elicitation of a nutritional history is directed toward the identification of underlying mechanisms that put patients at risk for nutritional depletion or excess. These mechanisms include inadequate intake, impaired absorption, decreased utilization, increased losses, and increased requirements for nutrients. Individuals with the characteristics listed in Table 97-3 are at particular risk for nutritional deficiencies. Physical Examination Physical findings that suggest vitamin, mineral, and protein-energy deficiencies and excesses are outlined in Table 97-4. Most of the physical findings are not specific for individual nutrient deficiencies and must be integrated with historic, anthropometric, and laboratory findings. For example, follicular hyperkeratosis on the back of the arms is a fairly common, normal finding. However, if it is widespread in a person who consumes few fruits and vegetables and smokes regularly (increasing ascorbic acid requirements), vitamin C deficiency is likely. Similarly, easily pluck-able hair may be a consequence of chemotherapy but suggests acute malnutrition/kwashiorkor in a hospitalized patient who has poorly healing surgical wounds and hypoalbuminemia. anthropometric Measurements Anthropometric measurements provide information on body muscle mass and fat reserves. The most practical and commonly used measurements are body weight, height, triceps skinfold (TSF), and midarm muscle circumference (MAMC). Body weight is one of the most useful nutritional parameters to follow in patients who are acutely or chronically ill. Unintentional weight loss during illness often reflects loss of lean body mass (muscle and organ tissue), especially if it is rapid and is not caused by diuresis. Such weight loss can be an ominous sign since it indicates use of vital body protein stores for metabolic fuel.
(Repro duced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 1804.) For partial obstruction, supportive care may be sufficient and should include NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and Foley catheterization to monitor ﬂ uid status. Surgery is required in cases of complete SBO, vascular compromise (necrotic bowel), or symptoms lasting > 3 days without resolution. Exploratory laparotomy may be performed with lysis of adhesions, resection of necrotic bowel, and evaluation for stricture, IBD, and hernias. There is a 2% mortality risk for a nonstrangulated SBO; strangulated SBO is associated with up to a 25% mortality rate depending on the time between diagnosis and treatment. A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern. Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction. Risk factors include recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobility, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, DM, and medications that slow GI motility (e.g., anticholinergics, opioids). Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements. Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds. A rectal exam is required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly patients. Diffusely distended loops of small and large bowel are seen on supine AXR with air-ﬂuid levels on upright view. A Gastrografin study can rule out partial obstruction; CT can rule out neo-In diagnosing ileus, look for plasms.
Candidal thrush. Workup should include an HIV test. Treat with nystatin oral suspension. ≤ 200 for P. jiroveci (with TMP-SMX); ≤ 50–100 for MAI (with clarithromycin/azithromycin). Pregnancy, vesicoureteral reﬂux, anatomic anomalies, indwelling catheters, kidney stones. 7–10 days. Lesion of 1° Lyme disease. Fever, heart murmur, Osler’s nodes, splinter hemorrhages, Janeway lesions, Roth’s spots. Parvovirus B19. Taenia solium (cysticercosis). Name the organism:

Pregnant women with pets

Alcoholic with pneumonia

A 55-year-old man who is a smoker and a heavy drinker presents with a new cough and ﬂulike symptoms. Gram stain shows no organisms; silver stain of sputum shows gram-negative rods. What is the diagnosis? A middle-aged man presents with acute-onset monoarticular joint pain and bilateral Bell’s palsy. What is the likely diagnosis, and how did he get it?
Plasma Na+ concentration was initially 129 meq/L, decreasing within 3 days to 118–120 meq/L despite fluid restriction to 1 L/d. A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a right 2.8 × 1.6 cm infrahilar mass and postobstructive pneumonia. The patient was an active smoker. Past medical history was notable for laryngeal carcinoma treated 15 years prior with radiation therapy, renal cell carcinoma, peripheral vascular disease, and hypothyroidism. On review of systems, he denied headache, nausea, and vomiting. He had chronic hip pain, managed with acetaminophen with codeine. Other medications included cilostazol, amoxicillin/clavulanate, digoxin, diltiazem, and thyroxine. He was euvolemic on examination, with no lymphadenopathy and a normal chest examination. Na+ 120 K+ 4.3 Cl− 89 HCO3− 23 BUN 8 Creat 1.0 Glu 93

Alb 3.1 Ca 8.9 Phos 2.8 Mg 2.0 Plasma osm 248 mOsm/kg

Cortisol 25 μg/dL TSH 2.6 Uric acid 2.7 mg/dL

Urine: Na+ 97 K+ 22 Cl− 86 Osm 597

The patient was treated with furosemide, 20 mg PO bid, and salt tablets. The plasma Na+ concentration increased to 129 meq/L with this therapy; however, the patient developed orthostatic hypotension and dizziness. He was started on demeclocycline, 600 mg PO in the morning and 300 mg in the evening, just before discharge from hospital. Plasma Na+ concentration increased to 140 meq/L with a BUN of 23 and creatinine of 1.4, at which point demeclocycline was reduced to 300 mg PO bid. Bronchoscopic biopsy eventually showed small-cell lung cancer; the patient declined chemotherapy and was admitted to hospice. What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options?
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
If a source of bleeding is not identified on plain film, CT of the chest should be performed. CT allows better delineation of bronchiectasis, alveolar filling, cavitary infiltrates, and masses than does chest radiograph. The practitioner should consider a CT protocol to assess for pulmonary embolism if the history or examination suggests venous thromboembolism as a cause of bleeding. Quantify amount of bleeding History and physical exam Patient with hemoptysis Mild Moderate Massive Rule out other sources: • Oropharynx • Gastrointestinal tract No risk factors* Risk factors* or recurrent bleeding Treat underlying disease (usually infection) CT scan if unrevealing, bronchoscopy Bleeding continues Treat underlying disease CT scan Bronchoscopy CXR, CBC, coagulation studies, UA, creatinine Secure airway Treat underlying disease Persistent bleeding *Risk Factors: smoking, age >40 Bleeding stops Embolization or resection FIguRE 48-2 Decision tree for evaluation of hemoptysis. CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; UA, urinalysis. Laboratory studies should include a complete blood count to assess both the hematocrit and the platelet count as well as coagulation studies. Renal function should be evaluated and urinalysis conducted because of the possibility of pulmonary-renal syndromes presenting with hemoptysis. The documentation of acute renal insufficiency or the detection of red blood cells or their casts on urinalysis should elevate suspicion of small-vessel vasculitis, and studies such as antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antiglomerular basement membrane antibody, and antinuclear antibody should be considered. If a patient is producing sputum, Gram’s and acid-fast staining as well as culture should be undertaken. If all of these studies are unrevealing, bronchoscopy should be considered. In any patient with a history of cigarette smoking, airway inspection should be part of the evaluation of new-onset hemoptysis as endobronchial lesions are not reliably visualized on CT.

For the most part, the treatment of hemoptysis varies with its etiology. However, large-volume, life-threatening hemoptysis generally requires immediate intervention regardless of the cause. The first step is to establish a patent airway, usually by endotracheal intubation and subsequent mechanical ventilation. As large-volume hemoptysis usually arises from an airway lesion, it is ideal to identify the site of bleeding by either chest imaging or bronchoscopy (more commonly rigid rather than flexible). The goals are then to isolate the bleeding to one lung and not to allow the preserved airspaces in the other lung to be filled with blood so that gas exchange is further impaired.
Drugs and metals (e.g., arsenic) aAlso lentigines. bPolyostotic fibrous dysplasia. cSee also “Papulonodular Skin Lesions.” dLate 1980s. Abbreviations: LAMB, lentigines, atrial myxomas, mucocutaneous myxomas, and blue nevi; LEOPARD, lentigines, ECG abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis and subaortic valvular stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth, and deafness (sensorineural); NAME, nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, and ephelides (freckles); POEMS, polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathies, M-protein, and skin changes. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases hyperpigmentation is seen on the neck, trunk, and thighs and is accompanied by nail dystrophy, pancytopenia, and leukoplakia of the oral and anal mucosae. The latter often develops into squamous cell carcinoma. In addition to the flagellate pigmentation (linear streaks) on the trunk, patients receiving bleomycin often have hyperpigmentation overlying the elbows, knees, and small joints of the hand. Localized hyperpigmentation is seen as a side effect of several other systemic medications, including those that produce fixed drug reactions (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], sulfonamides, barbiturates, and tetracyclines) and those that can complex with melanin (antimalarials) or iron (minocycline). Fixed drug eruptions recur in the exact same location as circular areas of erythema that can become bullous and then resolve as brown macules. The eruption usually appears within hours of administration of the offending agent, and common locations include the genitalia, distal extremities, and perioral region. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine produce gray-brown to blue-black discoloration of the shins, hard palate, and face, while blue macules (often misdiagnosed as bruises) can be seen on the lower extremities and in sites of inflammation with prolonged minocycline administration. Estrogen in oral contraceptives can induce melasma—symmetric brown patches on the face, especially the cheeks, upper lip, and forehead. Similar changes are seen in pregnancy and in patients receiving phenytoin. In the diffuse forms of hyperpigmentation, the darkening of the skin may be of equal intensity over the entire body or may be accentuated in sun-exposed areas. The causes of diffuse hyperpigmentation can be divided into four major groups—endocrine, metabolic, autoimmune, and drugs.
Pulmonary embolus. A large flling defect in the pulmonary artery is evident on pulmonary angiogram. Thrombolysis: Indicated only in cases of massive DVT or pulmonary embolism causing right heart failure and hemodynamic instability (contraindicated in patients with recent surgery or bleeding). DVT prophylaxis: Treat all immobile patients; give SQ heparin, LMWH, intermittent pneumatic compression of the lower extremities (less effective), and early ambulation (most effective). Often asymptomatic, or patients may present with chronic cough, dyspnea, and shortness of breath. Always inquire about smoking and exposure history. Serial CXRs: Determine the location, progression, and extent of the nodule. Chest CT: Determine the nature, extent, and infltrating nature of the nodule. Characteristics favoring carcinoma: Age > 45–50; smoking history; history of malignancy; new or enlarging (unless very rapidly enlarging) lesions; absence of calcifcation or irregular calcifcation; size > 2 cm; irregular margins. Lung nodule clues based on the history:

Recent immigrant: Think TB. From the southwestern United States: Think coccidioidomycosis. From the Ohio River Valley: Think histoplasmosis. Squamous and Small cell cancers are Central lesions. ■Characteristics favoring a benign lesion: Age < 35; no change from old flms; central/uniform/laminated/popcorn calcifcation; size < 2 cm; smooth margins. Surgical resection is indicated for nodules at high risk for malignancy.
Two randomized trials have demonstrated that both the open and laparoscopic approaches may be performed safely with equal incidence of postoperative complications, although the cosmetic result is clearly superior with the laparoscopic approach. Whether done through an open or laparoscopic approach, surgical treatment of pyloric stenosis involves splitting the pyloric muscle while leav-ing the underlying submucosa intact. The incision extends from just proximal to the pyloric vein of Mayo to the gastric antrum; it typically measures between 1 and 2 cm in length. Postop-eratively, IV fluids are continued for several hours, after which Pedialyte is offered, followed by formula or breast milk, which is gradually increased to 60 cc every 3 hours. Most infants can be discharged home within 24 to 48 hours following surgery. Recently, several authors have shown that ad lib feeds are safely tolerated by the neonate and result in a shorter hospital stay.The complications of pyloromyotomy include perforation of the mucosa (1–3%), bleeding, wound infection, and recur-rent symptoms due to inadequate myotomy. When perforation occurs, the mucosa is repaired with a stitch that is placed to tack the mucosa down and reapproximate the serosa in the region of the tear. A nasogastric tube is left in place for 24 hours. The outcome is generally very good.Intestinal Obstruction in the NewbornThe cardinal symptom of intestinal obstruction in the newborn  is bilious emesis. Prompt recognition and treatment of neonatal intestinal obstruction can truly be lifesaving.The incidence of neonatal intestinal obstruction is 1 in 2000 live births. The approach to intestinal obstruction in the newborn infant is critical for timely and appropriate interven-tion. When a neonate develops bilious vomiting, one must con-sider a surgical etiology. Indeed, the majority of newborns with bilious emesis have a surgical condition. In evaluating a poten-tial intestinal obstruction, it is helpful to determine whether the intestinal obstruction is either proximal or distal to the ligament  of Treitz. One must conduct a detailed prenatal and immediate postnatal history and a thorough physical examination.
Parents may report that the child has diarrhea because of soiling of liquid stool. Soiling may be frequent or continuous. On further questioning, the clinician learns that the child is passing large-caliber bowel movements that may occasionally block the toilet. Children younger than 3 years of age often present with painful defecation, impaction, and withholding. The history should include a complete review of systems for gastrointestinal, endocrine, and neurologic disorders and a developmental and psychosocial history. Stool impaction can be felt on abdominal examination in about 50% of patients at presentation. Firm packed stool in the rectum is highly predictive of fecal impaction. A rectal examination allows assessment of sphincter tone and size of the rectal vault. Evaluation of anal placement and existence of anal fissures also is helpful in considering etiology and severity. A neurologic examination, including lower extremity reflexes, anal wink, and cremasteric reflexes, may reveal underlying spinal cord abnormalities. Abdominal x-ray is not required. It can be helpful to showto the family the degree of colonic distention and fecal impaction. In general further studies, such as barium enema andrectal biopsy, are indicated only if an organic cause for theconstipation is indicated by history or physical examination(see Chapter 129). Similarly although endocrinologic conditions such as hypothyroidism can cause chronic constipation,laboratory studies are not indicated without history or physicalexamination suggesting such a disorder. The differential diagnosis for functional constipation and soiling includes organic causes of constipation (e.g., neurogenic, anatomic, endocrinologic, gastrointestinal, and pharmacologic).
A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease. Treatment for mild and severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Sudden onset of mental status changes, emesis, and liver dysfunction after taking aspirin. A child has loss of red light reﬂex. Diagnosis? Neuroblastoma. Esophageal atresia with distal TEF (85%). Unable to pass NG tube. Mild illness and/or low-grade fever, current antibiotic therapy, and prematurity. Ophthalmologic exam, CT, and MRI. CF or Hirschsprung’s disease. Duodenal atresia. Correct metabolic abnormalities. Then correct pyloric stenosis with pyloromyotomy.
Regurgitation, on the other hand, is effortless and not preceded by nausea. In neonates with true vomiting, congenital obstructive lesions should be considered. Allergic reactions to formula in the first 2 months of life may present with vomiting. Infantile GER (“spitting up”) occurs in most infants and can be large in volume, but is effortless and these infants do not appear ill. Pyloric stenosis occurs in the first months of life and is characterized by steadily worsening, forceful vomiting that occurs immediately after feedings. A visibly distended stomach, often with visible peristaltic waves, is often seen before vomiting. Pyloric stenosis is more common in male infants; the family history may be positive. Other obstructive lesions, such as intestinal duplication cysts, atresias, webs, and midgut

Determine degree of functional impairment (e.g., missing school) CBC ESR Amylase, lipase

Urinalysis Abdominal ultrasound—examine liver, bile ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, kidneys, ureters (move to follow up)

Trial of 3-day lactose-free diet CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with oral, rectal, and intravenous contrast

Barium upper GI series with small bowel follow-through

Endoscopy of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum

CBC, Complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GI, gastrointestinal. *Consider using one or more of these to investigate warning signs, abnormal laboratory tests, or specific or persistent symptoms. malrotation, should be considered. Metabolic disorders (e.g.,organic acidemias, galactosemia, urea cycle defects, adrenogenital syndromes) may present with vomiting in infants. Inolder children with acute vomiting, viruses and food poisoning are common. Other infections, especially streptococcalpharyngitis, urinary tract infections, and otitis media, commonly result in vomiting. When vomiting is chronic, centralnervous system (CNS) causes (increased intracranial pressure,migraine) must be considered. Cyclic vomiting syndrome or migraine may be the etiology of recurrent vomiting. Whenabdominal pain or bilious emesis accompanies vomiting, evaluation for bowel obstruction, peptic disorders, and appendicitismust be immediately initiated.
In general, when a low lesion is present, only a perineal operation is required without a colostomy. Infants with a high lesion require a colostomy in the newborn period, followed by a pull-through procedure at approximately 2 months of age. When a persistent cloaca is present, the urinary tract needs to be carefully evaluated at the time of colostomy formation to ensure that normal emptying can occur and to determine whether the bladder needs to be drained by means of a vesicostomy. If there is any doubt about the type of lesion, it is safer to perform a colostomy rather than jeopardize the infant’s long-term chances for continence by an injudicious perineal operation.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173612/02/19   11:26 AM 1737PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39The type of pull-through procedure favored by most pedi-atric surgeons today is the posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP procedure), as described by Peña and DeVries. This involves placing the patient in the prone jack-knife position, dividing the levator ani and external sphincter complex in the midline posteriorly, dividing the communication between the gastrointestinal tract and the urinary tract, and bringing down the rectum after sufficient length is achieved. The muscles are then reconstructed and sutured to the rectum. The outcome of 1192 patients who had undergone this procedure has been reviewed by Peña and Hong. Seventy-five percent of patients were found to have voluntary bowel movements, and nearly 40% were considered totally continent. As a rule, patients with high lesions demonstrate an increase incidence of incontinence, whereas those with low lesions are more likely to be consti-pated. Management of patients with high imperforate anus can be greatly facilitated using a laparoscopic assisted approach, in which the patient is operated on in the supine position, and the rectum is mobilized down to the fistulous connection to the bladder neck. This fistulous connection is then divided, and the rectum is completely mobilized down to below the peritoneal reflection. The operation then proceeds at the perineum, and the location of the muscle complex is determined using the nerve stimulator. A Veress needle is then advanced through the skin at the indicated site, with the laparoscope providing guidance to the exact intrapelvic orientation. Dilators are then placed over the Veress needle, the rectum is then pulled through this perito-neal opening, and an anoplasty is performed.JAUNDICEThe Approach to the Jaundiced InfantJaundice is present during the first week of life in 60% of term infants and 80% of preterm infants. There is usually accumula-tion of unconjugated bilirubin, but there may also be deposition of direct bilirubin.
Uses three-finger (immature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (nonspecif c). Waves bye-bye; plays pat-a-cake. 12 months Cruises (11 months); walks alone. Uses two-finger (mature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (specif c). Imitates actions; separation anxiety. 15 months Walks backward. Uses cup. Uses 4–6 words. Temper tantrums. 18 months Runs; kicks a ball. Builds tower of 2–4 cubes. Names common objects. May start toilet training.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Names common objects. May start toilet training. 2 years Walks up/down steps with help; jumps. Builds tower of six cubes. Uses two-word phrases. Follows two-step commands; removes clothes. 3 years Rides tricycle; climbs stairs with alternating feet (3–4 years). Copies a circle; uses utensils. Uses three-word sentences. Brushes teeth with help; washes/dries hands. Hops. Copies a square. Knows colors and some numbers. Cooperative play; plays board games. Skips; walks backward for long distances.
The growth pattern of a child with lowweight, length, and head circumference is commonly associated with familial short stature (see Chapter 173). Thesechildren are genetically normal but are smaller than most

Discrepant percentiles (e.g., weight 5th, length 5th, head circumference 50th, or other discrepancies)

Caloric insufficiency Midparental heights Thyroid hormone Growth factors, growth hormone testing Evaluation of pubertal children. A child who, by age, is preadolescent or adolescentand who starts puberty later than others may have the normal variant called constitutional short stature (see Chapter173); careful examination for abnormalities of pubertaldevelopment should be done, although most are normal. Anevaluation for primary amenorrhea should be consideredfor any female adolescent who has not reached menarche by15 years or has not done so within 3 years of thelarche. Lackof breast development by age 13 years also should be evaluated (see Chapter 174). Starting out in high growth percentiles, many children assumea lower percentile between 6 and 18 months until they matchtheir genetic programming, then grow along new, lower percentiles. They usually do not decrease more than two major percentiles and have normal developmental, behavioral, and physicalexaminations. These children with catch-down growth should be followed closely, but no further evaluation is warranted. Infants born small for gestational age, or prematurely, ingestmore breast milk or formula and, unless there are complicationsthat require extra calories, usually exhibit catch-up growth in the first 6 months. These infants should be fed on demand and provided as much as they want unless they are vomiting (notjust spitting up [see Chapter 128]). Some may benefit from ahigher caloric content formula. Many psychosocial risk factorsthat may have led to being born small or early may contributeto nonorganic failure to thrive (see Chapter 21). Converselyinfants who recover from being low birth weight or prematurehave an increased risk of developing childhood obesity. Growth of the nervous system is most rapid in the first 2 years, correlating with increasing physical, emotional, behavioral, and cognitive development. There is again rapid change during adolescence.
Although the focus in adolescent care is on psychosocial issues, a general examination also needs to be performed (Table 68-1). Pediatric issues, such as immunization (see Chapter 94) and health screening, should be included (see Table 9-5). Rapid changes in physical appearance and behavior are the major characteristics of early adolescence, leading to a great dealof self-consciousness and need for privacy. The history focuseson the early adolescent’s physical and psychosocial health. Autonomy and a global sense of identity are the major characteristics of middle adolescence. The history focuses on

Explain to your patient what you are going to do. Explain how you are going to do it. Ask whether your adolescent wants his or her parent in the room. * Be sensitive to the adolescent’s needs. Always use a sheet or blanket to provide privacy. Let the adolescent remain dressed and work around the clothing. Ask some questions as you go through the physical to keep the adolescent at ease. Give reassurance that elements of the physical are normal for this age. Examination can be used to offer reassurance about normalcy.†

Assess the following:

Skeletal: scoliosis, Osgood-Schlatter disease, slipped capital

Signs of substance abuse, risk-taking behaviors, and trauma *If not, you will need a chaperone. †For example, 70% of boys can have breast enlargement (gynecomastia), and girls often have one breast larger than the other.
As stated earlier, rheumatologic disease may manifest primarily as lung disease. Owing to this association, particular attention should be paid to joint and skin examination. Clubbing can be found in many lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, IPF, and lung cancer. Cyanosis is seen in hypoxemic respiratory disorders that result in >5 g of deoxygenated hemoglobin/dL. The sequence of studies is dictated by the clinician’s differential diagnosis, as determined by the history and physical examination. Acute respiratory symptoms are often evaluated with multiple tests performed at the same time in order to diagnose any life-threatening diseases rapidly (e.g., pulmonary embolism or multilobar pneumonia). In contrast, chronic dyspnea and cough can be evaluated in a more protracted, stepwise fashion. Pulmonary Function Testing (See also Chap. 307) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is an effort-dependent test used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis. A diminished-forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as <70% of the predicted value) is diagnostic of obstruction. In addition to measuring FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop (which is effort-independent). A plateau of the inspiratory and expiratory curves suggests large-airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively. Spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including measurement of lung volumes and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity <80% of the predicted value for a patient’s age, race, sex, and height defines restrictive pathophysiology.
Patient in supine position. Bottom panel: Extensive lung fibrosis with ground glass opacities, coarse reticular honeycombing, and traction bronchiectasis. (Courtesy of Rishi Agrawal, MD.) the course of the disease (within the first 3 years), when the FVC can decline by 30% per year. Pulmonary involvement can remain asymptomatic until it is advanced. The most common presenting respiratory symptoms— exertional dyspnea, fatigue, and reduced exercise tolerance—are subtle and slowly progressive. A chronic dry cough may be present. Physical examination may reveal “Velcro” crackles at the lung bases. Pulmonary function testing (PFT) is a sensitive method for detecting early pulmonary involvement. The most common abnormalities are reductions in FVC, total lung capacity (TLC), and DLco. A reduction in DLcothatis significantly out of proportion to the reduction in lung volumes should raise suspicion for pulmonary vascular disease, but may also be due to anemia. Oxygen desaturation with exercise is common. Chest radiography can rule out infection and other causes of pulmonary involvement, but compared to HRCT, it is relatively insensitive for detection of early ILD. HRCT shows subpleural reticular linear opacities and ground-glass opacifications, predominantly in the lower lobes, even in asymptomatic patients (Fig. 382-8).
Spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including measurement of lung volumes and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity <80% of the predicted value for a patient’s age, race, sex, and height defines restrictive pathophysiology. Restriction can result from parenchymal disease, neuromuscular weakness, or chest wall or pleural diseases. Restriction with impaired gas exchange, as indicated by a decreased DLCO, suggests parenchymal lung disease. Additional testing, such as measurements of maximal expiratory pressure and maximal inspiratory pressure, can help diagnose neuromuscular weakness. Normal spirometry, normal lung volumes, and a low DLCO should prompt further evaluation for pulmonary vascular disease. Arterial blood gas testing is often helpful in assessing respiratory 1663 disease. Hypoxemia, while usually apparent with pulse oximetry, can be further evaluated with the measurement of arterial PO2 and the calculation of an alveolar gas and arterial blood oxygen tension difference ([A–a]DO2). Patients with diseases that cause ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunt physiology have an increased (A–a) DO2 at rest. Arterial blood gas testing also allows the measurement of arterial PCO2. Hypercarbia can accompany severe airway obstruction (e.g., COPD) or progressive restrictive physiology, as in patients with neuromuscular weakness. Chest Imaging (See Chap. 308e) Most patients with disease of the respiratory system undergo imaging of the chest as part of the initial evaluation. Clinicians should generally begin with a plain chest radio-graph, preferably posterior-anterior and lateral films. Several findings, including opacities of the parenchyma, blunting of the costophrenic angles, mass lesions, and volume loss, can be very helpful in determining an etiology.
Presents with cough, episodic wheezing, dyspnea, and/or chest tightness. Symptoms often worsen at night or early in the morning. Exam reveals wheezing, prolonged expiratory duration (↓ I/E ratio), accessory muscle use, tachypnea, tachycardia, ↓ breath sounds (late sign), ↓O2 saturation (late sign), hyperresonance, and possible pulsus paradoxus. ■ABGs: Mild hypoxia and respiratory alkalosis. Normalizing PCO2, respiratory acidosis, and more severe hypoxia in an acute exacerbation warrant close observation, as they may indicate fatigue and impending respiratory failure. F IGU R E 2.1 5-1. Lung volumes in the interpretation of pulmonary function tests. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gomella LG et al. Clinician’s Pocket Reference, 11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 18-1.) T AB LE 2.1 5-1. Obstructive vs. Restrictive Lung Diseasea a FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC = forced vital capacity. Spirometry/PFTs: ↓ FEV1/FVC; peak fow is diminished acutely; ↑ RV and total lung capacity (TLC).
The figures at the bottom of each column show the typical configuration of flow-volume loops in each condition, including the flow-volume relationship during tidal breathing. b.d., bronchodilator; DL co, diffusion capacity of lung for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FRC, functional residual capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity; Raw, airways resistance; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity. physiologic abnormalities may or may not provide sufficient information by which to discriminate among conditions. Figure 306e-6 lists abnormalities in pulmonary function testing that are typically found in a number of common respiratory disorders and highlights the simultaneous occurrence of multiple physiologic abnormalities. The coexistence of some of these respiratory disorders results in more complex superposition of these abnormalities. Methods to measure respiratory system function clinically are described later in this chapter. Ventilatory Restriction Due to Increased Elastic Recoil—Example: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis raises lung recoil at all lung volumes, thereby lowering TLC, FRC, and RV as well as forced vital capacity (FVC). Maximal expiratory flows are also reduced from normal values but are elevated when considered in relation to lung volumes. Increased flow occurs both because the increased lung recoil drives greater maximal flow at any lung volume and because airway diameters are relatively increased due to greater radially outward traction exerted on bronchi by the stiff lung parenchyma. For the same reason, airway resistance is also normal. Destruction of the pulmonary capillaries by the fibrotic process results in a marked reduction in diffusing capacity (see below). Oxygenation is often severely reduced by persistent perfusion of alveolar units that are relatively underventilated due to fibrosis of nearby (and mechanically linked) lung. The flow-volume loop (see below) looks like a miniature version of a normal loop but is shifted toward lower absolute lung volumes and displays maximal expiratory flows that are increased for any given volume over the normal tracing. Ventilatory Restriction Due to Chest Wall Abnormality—Example: Moderate Obesity As the size of the average American continues to increase, this pattern may become the most common of pulmonary function abnormalities. In moderate obesity, the outward recoil of the chest wall is blunted by the weight of chest wall fat and the space occupied by intraabdominal fat.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74:1. Wei J et al: Nicorandil stimulates a Na+/Ca2+ exchanger by activating guanylate cyclase in guinea pig cardiac myocytes. Pflugers Arch 2016;468:693. The case described is typical of coronary artery disease in a patient with hyperlipidemia. Her hyperlipidemia should be treated vigorously to slow progression of, and if pos-sible reverse, the coronary lesions that are present (see Chapter 35). Coronary angiography is not indicated unless symptoms become much more frequent and severe; revas-cularization may then be considered. Medical treatment of her acute episodes of angina should include sublingual tab-lets or sublingual nitroglycerin spray 0.4–0.6 mg. Relief of discomfort within 2–4 minutes can be expected. To prevent episodes of angina, a βblocker such as metoprolol should be tried first. If contraindications to the use of a β blocker are present, a mediumto long-acting calcium channel blocker such as verapamil, diltiazem, or amlodipine is likely to be effective. Because of this patient’s family history, an antiplatelet drug such as low-dose aspirin is indicated. Care-ful follow-up is mandatory with repeat lipid panels, repeat dietary counseling, and lipid-lowering therapy; coronary angiography should also be considered if her condition worsens. Sildenafil Viagra, Revatio

Tadalafil Cialis, Adcirca

Cilostazol Generic, Pletal

Pentoxifylline Generic, Trental

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 55-year-old man noticed shortness of breath with exer-tion while on a camping vacation in a national park. He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue.
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
Hepatic bile flow is suppressed, and reabsorption and regurgitation of conjugated bilirubin into the bloodstream lead to jaundice accompanied by dark urine (bilirubinuria) and light-colored (acholic) stools. CBD stones should be suspected in any patient with cholecystitis whose serum bilirubin level is >85.5 μmol/L (5 mg/dL). The maximum bilirubin level is seldom >256.5 μmol/L (15.0 mg/dL) in patients with choledocholithiasis unless concomitant hepatic or renal disease or another factor leading to marked hyperbilirubinemia exists. Serum bilirubin levels ≥342.0 μmol/L (20 mg/dL) should suggest the possibility of neoplastic obstruction. The serum alkaline phosphatase level is almost always elevated in biliary obstruction. A rise in alkaline phosphatase often precedes clinical jaundice and may be the only abnormality in routine liver function tests. There may be a twoto tenfold elevation of serum aminotransferases, especially in association with acute obstruction. Following relief of the obstructing process, serum aminotransferase elevations usually return rapidly to normal, while the serum bilirubin level may take 1–2 weeks to return to normal. The alkaline phosphatase level usually falls slowly, lagging behind the decrease in serum bilirubin. pancreatitis The most common associated entity discovered in patients with nonalcoholic acute pancreatitis is biliary tract disease. Biochemical evidence of pancreatic inflammation complicates acute cholecystitis in 15% of cases and choledocholithiasis in >30%, and the common factor appears to be the passage of gallstones through the common duct. Coexisting pancreatitis should be suspected in patients with symptoms of cholecystitis who develop (1) back pain or pain to the left of the abdominal midline, (2) prolonged vomiting with paralytic ileus, or (3) a pleural effusion, especially on the left side. Surgical treatment of gallstone disease is usually associated with resolution of the pancreatitis. seconDary biliary cirrHosis Secondary biliary cirrhosis may complicate prolonged or intermittent duct obstruction with or without recurrent cholangitis. Although this complication may be seen in patients with choledocholithiasis, it is more common in cases of prolonged obstruction from stricture or neoplasm.
A UTI in the setting of ureteral obstruction is a medical emergency that requires immediate restoration of drainage by placement of either a ureteral stent or a percutaneous nephrostomy tube. Other conditions to consider in the differential diagnosis include muscular or skeletal pain, herpes zoster, duodenal ulcer, abdominal aortic aneurysm, gynecologic conditions, ureteral stricture, and ureteral obstruction by materials other than a stone, such as a blood clot or sloughed papilla. Extraluminal processes can lead to ureteral compression and obstruction; however, because of the gradual onset, these conditions do not typically present with renal colic. Diagnosis and Intervention Serum chemistry findings are typically normal, but the white blood cell count may be elevated. Examination of the urine sediment will usually reveal red and white blood cells and occasionally crystals (Fig. 342-1). The absence of hematuria does not exclude a stone, particularly when urine flow is completely obstructed by a stone. The diagnosis is often made on the basis of the history, physical examination, and urinalysis. Thus, it may not be necessary to wait for radiographic confirmation before treating the symptoms. The diagnosis is confirmed by an appropriate imaging study—preferably helical CT, which is highly sensitive, allows visualization of uric acid stones (traditionally considered “radiolucent”), and is able to avoid radiocontrast (Fig. 342-2). Helical CT detects stones as small as 1 mm that may be missed by other imaging modalities. Typically, helical CT reveals a ureteral stone or evidence of recent passage (e.g., perinephric stranding or hydronephrosis), whereas a plain abdominal radiograph (kidney/ureter/bladder, or KUB) can miss a stone in the ureter or kidney, even if it is radiopaque, and does not provide information on obstruction. Abdominal ultrasound offers the advantage of avoiding radiation and provides

FIGuRE 342-1 Urine sediment from a patient with calcium oxalate stones (left) and a patient with cystine stones (right). Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals are bipyramidally shaped, and cystine crystals are hexagonal.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008: Fig. 14-2.) ■Bacterial culture by sinus tap is the gold standard for diagnosis but is not routinely performed because of discomfort. Endoscopically guided cultures from the middle meatus are gaining popularity. Most cases of acute sinusitis are viral and/or self-limited and can thus be treated with symptomatic therapy (decongestants, antihistamines, pain relief). Acute bacterial sinusitis (usually < 7 days): Consider amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg PO TID × 10 days or, alternatively, clarithromycin, azithromycin, TMP-SMX, fuoroquinolone, or a second-generation cephalosporin × 10 days. Chronic sinusitis (4–12 weeks): Adjuvant therapy with intranasal corticosteroids, decongestants, and antihistamines may be useful in combating the allergic/infammatory component of the disease. Antibiotics given are similar to those used for acute disease, although a longer course (3–6 weeks) may be necessary. Surgical intervention may also be required. A pulmonary fungal infection endemic to the southwestern United States (e.g., San Joaquin Valley, California). Can present as an acute or subacute pneumonia or as a fulike illness, and may involve extrapulmonary sites, including bone, CNS, and skin. The incubation period is 1–4 weeks after exposure. Filipino, African-American, pregnant, and HIV-patients are at ↑ risk. Potential complications of sinusitis include meningitis, frontal bone osteomyelitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis, and abscess formation. Consider coccidioidomycosis in the HIV-, Filipino, African-American, or pregnant patient from the southwestern United States with respiratory infection.
Broad antibiotic coverage of common aerobes and anaerobes is necessary but should be limited to patients with acute pain, especially unilateral maxillary tooth, facial, or sinus pain, and purulent discharge, particularly if the symptoms initially improved and then worsen. This cluster of symptoms is more suggestive of bacterial rather than viral acute sinusitis. It should be noted that the majority of acute bacterial sinusitis cases resolve in 7 to 10 days without antibiotics, similarly to the viral form. For acute bacterial sinus infections, amoxicillin (500 mg three times a day) or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (1 tablet twice a day) remains the treatment of choice. Amoxicillin is inexpensive, penetrates the sinus tissues well, and can be changed to another antibiotic if symptoms have not improved in 48 to 72 hours. If these give only a minimal or no response after 7 days, consider broader spectrum antibiotics. If beta-lactam resistance is likely, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (875 mg twice daily) or azithromycin (5-day course once a day) may be used. Other second-line drugs include cefuroxime (250 mg twice daily), ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg twice daily), clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily), levoﬂoxacin (500 mg once a day), and loracarbef (400 mg twice daily). The usual treatment course is 10 to 14 days, and patients should be informed that relapses might occur if the full course of treatment is not completed. Chronic sinusitis may result from repeated infections with inadequate drainage. The interval between infections becomes increasingly shorter until there are no remissions. Presenting symptoms are recurrent pain in the malar area or chronic postnasal drip. In the preantibiotic era, chronic sinusitis was the result of repeated acute sinusitis with incomplete resolution, whereas allergy is currently a more common cause. Injury of surface ciliated epithelium results in impaired removal of mucus. A vicious cycle ensues of incomplete resolution of infection, followed by reinfection, and ending with the emergence of opportunistic organisms.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;4:CD005149. 5. Dolor RJ, Witsell DL, Hellkamp AS, et al. Comparison of cefuroxime with or without intranasal ﬂuticasone for the treatment of rhinosinusitis. JAMA 2001;286:3097–3105. 6. Ahovuo-Saloranta A, Borisenko OV, Kovanen N, et al. Antibiotics for acute maxillary sinusitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;2:CD000243. 7. Kassel JC, King D, Spurling GKP, et al. Saline nasal irrigation for acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;3:CD0068921. 8. Smith SM, Fahay T, Smucny J, et al.
Acute bacterial sinusitis. N Eng J Med 2004;351:902– 910. 2. Williams JN, Simel DL. Does this patient have sinusitis? : Diagnosing acute sinusitis by history and physical examination. JAMA 1993;270:1242–1246. 3. Hirschmann JV. Antibiotics for common respiratory tract infections. Arch Intern Med 2002;162:256–264. 4. Zalmanovici TA, Yaphe J. Intranasal steroids for acute sinusitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;4:CD005149. 5.
Empirical antibiotic therapy for adults with community-acquired sinusitis should consist of the narrowest-spectrum agent active against the most common bacterial pathogens, including

S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae—e.g., amoxicillin or amoxicillin/ clavulanate (with the decision guided by local rates of β-lactamaseproducing H. influenzae). No clinical trials support the use of broader-spectrum agents for routine cases of bacterial sinusitis, even in the current era of drug-resistant S. pneumoniae. For those patients who do not respond to initial antimicrobial therapy, sinus aspiration and/or lavage by an otolaryngologist should be considered. Antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent episodes of recurrent acute bacterial sinusitis is not recommended. Surgical intervention and IV antibiotic administration usually are reserved for patients with severe disease or those with intra-cranial complications such as abscess and orbital involvement. Immunocompromised patients with acute invasive fungal sinusitis usually require extensive surgical debridement and treatment with IV antifungal agents active against fungal hyphal forms, such as amphotericin B. Specific therapy should be individualized according to the fungal species and its susceptibilities as well as the individual patient’s characteristics. Treatment of nosocomial sinusitis should begin with broad-spectrum antibiotics to cover common and often resistant pathogens such as S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli. Therapy then should be tailored to the results of culture and susceptibility testing of sinus aspirates. CHAPTER 44 Sore Throat, Earache, and Upper Respiratory Symptoms

Chronic sinusitis is characterized by symptoms of sinus inflammation lasting >12 weeks. This illness is most commonly associated with either bacteria or fungi, and clinical cure in most cases is very difficult. Many patients have undergone treatment with repeated courses of antibacterial agents and multiple sinus surgeries, increasing their risk of colonization with antibiotic-resistant pathogens and of surgical complications. These patients often have high rates of morbidity, sometimes over many years. In chronic bacterial sinusitis, infection is thought to be due to the impairment of mucociliary clearance from repeated infections rather than to persistent bacterial infection.
Effusions due to infection are usually associated with fever, malaise, poor appetite, pleuritic chest pain, and splinting. Physical findings include tachypnea, decreased breath sounds, dullness to percussion, and decreased tactile fremitus. Large effusions may occupy more than half the hemithorax and cause a mediastinal shift away from the affected side, compromising respiratory status, particularly in young children. The presence of pleural fluid can often be confirmed by chest radiograph. In addition to anteroposterior and lateral projections, a decubitus view should be done to assess for layering of fluid. Chest ultrasonography is useful for confirming the presence of the effusion and quantifying its size. CT scans of the chest can help differentiate pleural fluid from parenchymal lesions and pleural masses. Both ultrasonography and CT scans can determine whether parapneumonic effusions contain loculations (fibrous strands that compartmentalize the effusion). The analysis of pleural fluid is useful in differentiating a transudate from an exudate. Routine tests on pleural fluid such as cell count, pH, protein, lactose dehydrogenase, and glucose characterize the effusions. Triglyceride levels, cytology, hematocrit, gram and acid fast bacilli stain, culture, and adenosine deaminase levels can be useful in diagnosing

Pleural fluid protein/serum protein ratio greater than 0.5 OR Pleural fluid LDH/serum LDH ratio greater than 0.6 OR Pleural fluid LDH greater than two-thirds the upper limits of

Positive acid fast bacilli stain, culture Pleural fluid protein greater than 4 g/dL Pleural fluid adenosine deaminase level greater than 35-50 U/L Pleural fluid glucose 30-50 mg/dL

Pleural fluid hematocrit/serum hematocrit greater than 0.5

LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase. chylous, malignant, and tuberculous effusions (Table 138-1).However, the yield of pleural fluid cultures is low. Transudative pleural effusions have a low specific gravity (<1.015) and protein content (<2.5 g/dL), low lactate dehydrogenase activity (<200 IU/L), and a low white blood cell (WBC) count with few polymorphonuclear cells. In contrast, exudates are characterized by high specific gravity and high protein (>3 g/dL) and lactate dehydrogenase (>250 IU/L) levels. They may also have a low pH (<7.2); low glucose level (<40 mg/dL); and a high WBC count with many lymphocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
Gram stain, culture, or broad-range bacterial PCR may lead to microbiologic diagnosis. The pleural fluid should be cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses. If the fluid is grossly purulent, removal reduces the patient’s toxicity and associated discomfort and may facilitate more rapid recovery. If the accumulation is large and impairs the ability of the lung to expand, removal of the fluid improves pulmonary mechanics and gas exchange. Frontal and lateral radiographs are required to localize disease and adequately visualize retrocardiac infiltrates and are recommended for diagnosis among hospitalized children, but they are not necessary to confirm the diagnosis in well-appearing outpatients. Although there are characteristic radiographic findings of pneumonia, radiography alone cannot provide a definitive microbiologic diagnosis. Bacterial pneumonia characteristically shows lobar consolidation, or a round pneumonia, with pleural effusion in 10% to 30% of cases (Fig. 110-1).Viral pneumonia characteristically shows diffuse, streaky infiltrates of bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-2) and hyperinflation. Atypical pneumonia, such as with M. pneumoniae and

Figure 110-1 Acute lobar pneumonia of the lingula in a 6-year-old child with high fever, cough, and chest pain. Frontal chest radiograph shows airspace consolidation, which obliterates the silhouette of the heart border on the left. The left hemidiaphragm is mildly elevated as a result of splinting. (From Markowitz RI: Diagnostic imaging. In Jen-son HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 133.) Figure 110-2 Diffuse viral bronchopneumonia in a 12-year-old boy with cough, fever, and wheezing.
In Jen-son HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 133.) Figure 110-2 Diffuse viral bronchopneumonia in a 12-year-old boy with cough, fever, and wheezing. Frontal chest radiograph shows bilateral, perihilar, peribronchial thickening, and shaggy infiltrate. Focal airspace disease representing consolidation or atelectasis is present in the medial portion of the right upper lobe. The findings are typical of bronchopneumonia. (From Markowitz RI: Diagnostic imaging. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 132.) C. pneumoniae, shows increased interstitial markings or bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-3). Chest radiographs may be normal in early pneumonia, with infiltrates appearing during treatment as hydration is restored. Hilar lymphadenopathy is uncommon with bacterial pneumonia but may be a sign of tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, or an underlying malignant neoplasm. Decubitus views or ultrasound should be used to assess size of pleural effusions and whether they are freely mobile. Figure 110-3 Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection (atypical pneumonia) in a 14-year-old boy with malaise, dry cough, and mild shortness of breath for 1 week. Frontal chest radiograph shows a diffuse pattern of increased interstitial markings, including Kerley lines. The heart is normal, and there are no focal infiltrates.
He reports drinking about 6 beers per day. In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and an HIV test returns with a positive result. What drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmonary tubercu-losis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) would be likely to cause toxicity? Mycobacteria are intrinsically resistant to most antibiotics. Because they grow more slowly than other bacteria, antibiotics that are most active against rapidly growing cells are relatively ineffective. Mycobacterial cells can also be dormant and, thus, resistant to many drugs or killed only very slowly. The lipid-rich mycobacterial cell wall is impermeable to many agents. Mycobacterial species are intracellular pathogens, and organisms residing within macrophages are inaccessible to drugs that penetrate these cells poorly. Finally, mycobacteria are notorious for their ability to develop resistance. Combinations of two or more drugs are required to overcome these obstacles and to prevent emergence of resistance during the course of therapy. The response of mycobacterial infections to chemotherapy is slow, and treatment must be administered for months to years, depending on which drugs are used.
Presents with acute-onset high fever (39–40°C), dysphagia, drooling, a mufﬂed voice, inspiratory retractions, cyanosis, and soft stridor. Patients sit with the neck hyperextended and the chin protruding (“sniffing dog” position) and lean forward in a “tripod” position to maximize air entry. Untreated infection can lead to life-threatening airway obstruction and respiratory arrest. Diagnosed by clinical impression. The differential diagnosis must include diffuse and localized causes of airway obstruction (see Tables 2.13-5 and 2.13-6). The airway must be secured before def nitive diagnosis. In light of potential laryngospasm and airway compromise, do not examine the throat unless an anesthesiologist or otolaryngologist is present. Definitive diagnosis is made via direct fiberoptic visualization of a cherry-red, swollen epiglottis and arytenoids. Lateral x-ray shows a swollen epiglottis obliterating the valleculae (“thumbprint sign”; see Figure 2.13-3). This disease is a true emergency. Keep the patient (and parents) calm, call anesthesia, and transfer the patient to the OR. Treat with endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy and IV antibiotics (ceftriaxone or cefuroxime). Bacterial meningitis most often occurs in children < 3 years of age; common organisms include S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and E. coli. Enteroviruses are the most common agents of viral meningitis and occur in children of all ages. Risk factors include sinofacial infections, trauma, and sepsis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD0001 9,2015

Sayle AE, Savitz DA, Thorps]M ]r, et al: Sexual activity during late pregnancy and risk of preterm delivery. Obstet Gynecol 97:283, 2001

Schau berger CW, Rooney BL, Brimer LM: Factors that inluence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 9:424, 1992

Schrag S]: Maternal immunization to prevent neonatal group B streptococcal disease. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):199,s2016

Scott DE, Pritchard ]A, Satin AS, et al: Iron deficiency during pregnancy. In Hallberg L, Harwerth HG, Vannotti A (eds): Iron Deiciency: Pathogenesis, Clinical Aspects, Therapy. New York, Academic Press, 19

Screnci M, Murgi E, Valle V, et al: Sibling cord blood donor program for hematopoietic cell transplantation: the 20-year experience in the Rome Cord Blood Bank. Blood Cells Mol Dis 57:71, 2016

Sibai BM, Villar MA, Bray E: Magnesium supplementation dring pregnancy: a double-blind randomized controlled clinical trial. Ams] Obstet Gynecol 161:115,s1989

Siddique ], Lauderdale OS, VanderWeele T], et al: Trends in prenatal ultrasound use in the United States. Med Care 47:1129,2009

Siu AL, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med 163(8):622,s2015

Smith CA: Efects of maternal under nutrition upon the newborn infant in Holland 0944-1945). Am] Obstet GynecoI30:229, 1947

Smith MW, Marcus PS, Wurtz LD: Orthopedic issues in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 63: 103, 2008

Spierings EL, Sabin TO: De novo headache during pregnancy and puerperium. Neurologist 21(1):1,s2016

Spindel ER, McEvoy CT: The role of nicotine in the efects of maternal smoking during pregnancy on lung development and childhood respiratory disease: implications for dangers of E-cigarettes. Am ] Respir Crit Care Med 193(5):486,s2016

Staruch M, Kucharcyzk A, Zawadzka K, et al: Sexual activity during pregnancy. 0):53,s2016

Stein Z, Susser M, Saenger G, et al: Nutrition and mental performance.
Apgar score is based on Appearance, Pulse, Grimace,

Activity, and Respiration. Apgar scores < 7 may require further evaluation. If Apgar score remains low at later time points, there is  risk the child will develop long-term neurologic damage. Milestone dates are ranges that have been approximated and vary by source. Children not meeting milestones may need assessment for potential developmental delay. Cruises, takes first steps (by = age (yr) × 3 Cutlery—feeds self with fork and spoon (by 20 mo) Kicks ball (by 24 mo)

Defined as < 2500 g. Caused by prematurity or intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Associated with  risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) and with  overall mortality. Lactation After parturition and delivery of placenta, rapid  in progesterone disinhibits prolactin • initiation of lactation. Suckling is required to maintain milk production and ejection, since  nerve stimulation  oxytocin and prolactin. Prolactin—induces and maintains lactation and  reproductive function. Oxytocin—assists in milk letdown; also promotes uterine contractions. Breast milk is the ideal nutrition for infants < 6 months old. Contains maternal immunoglobulins (conferring passive immunity; mostly IgA), macrophages, lymphocytes. Breast milk reduces infant infections and is associated with  risk for child to develop asthma, allergies, diabetes mellitus, and obesity. Guidelines recommend exclusively breastfed infants get vitamin D and possibly iron supplementation.
Some extremely immature infants weighing less than 1000 g at birth may be unable to expand their lungs, even in the absence of other pathology. Their compliant chest walls and surfactant deficiency may result in poor air exchange, retractions, hypoxia, and apnea. The newborn (particularly a preterm infant) responds paradoxically to hypoxia with apnea rather than tachypnea as occurs in adults. Episodes of intrauterine asphyxia also may depress the neonatal central nervous system. If recovery of the fetal heart rate occurs as a result of improved uteroplacental perfusion, fetal hypoxia and acidosis may resolve. Nonetheless, if the effect on the respiratory center is more severe, a newborn may not initiate an adequate ventilatory response at birth and may undergo another episode of asphyxia. The Apgar examination, a rapid scoring system based on physiologic responses to the birth process, is a good method for assessing the need to resuscitate a newborn (Table 58-8).At intervals of 1 minute and 5 minutes after birth, each of the five physiologic parameters is observed or elicited by a qualified examiner. Full-term infants with a normal cardiopulmonary adaptation should score 8 to 9 at 1 and 5 minutes. Apgar scores of 4 to 7 warrant close attention to determine whether the infant’s status will improve and to ascertain whether any pathologic condition is contributing to the low Apgar score. By definition, an Apgar score of 0 to 3 represents either a cardiopulmonary arrest or a condition caused by severe bradycardia, hypoventilation, or central nervous system depression. Most low Apgar scores are caused by difficulty in establishing adequate ventilation and not by primary cardiac pathology. In addition to an Apgar score of 0 to 3, most infants with asphyxia severe enough to cause neurologic injury also manifest fetal acidosis (pH <7); seizures, coma, or hypotonia; and multiorgan dysfunction. Low Apgar scores may be caused by fetal hypoxia or other factors listed in Table 58-7. Most infants with low Apgar scores respond to assisted ventilation by face mask or by endotracheal intubation and usually do not need emergency medication. Resuscitation of a newborn with a low Apgar score follows the same systematic sequence as that for resuscitation of older patients, but in the newborn period this simplified ABCD approach requires some qualification (Fig.
Rates of preterm labor, preeclampsia, fetal-growth restriction, and stillbirth are increased (Bo, 2016). Management depends on gestational age, and supportive care includes continuous infection surveillance and prompt antimicrobial therapy. Granulocyte transfusions are given only during infections. Red cells are transfused to improve symptomatic anemia and routinely to maintain the hematocrit at or above 20 volumes percent. Platelet transfusions may be needed to control hemorrhage. Maternal mortality rates reported since 1960 have averaged nearly 50 percent, however, better outcomes have been reported more recently (Choudhry, 2002; Kwon, 2006). Several reports describe successful pregnancies in women who have undergone bone marrow transplantation (BorgnaPignatti, 1996; Eliyahu, 1994). In their review, Sanders and coworkers (1996) reported 72 pregnancies in 41 women who had undergone transplantation. In the 52 pregnancies resulting in a liveborn neonate, almost half were complicated by preterm delivery or hypertension. Our experiences with a few of these women indicate that they have normal pregnancy-augmented erythropoiesis and total blood volume expansion. Excessive erythrocytosis during pregnancy is usually related to chronic hypoxia from maternal congenital cardiac disease or a chronic pulmonary disorder. Unusually heavy cigarette smoking can cause polycythemia. We have encountered otherwise healthy pregnant women who were heavy smokers, had chronic bronchitis, and had hematocrits ranging from 55 to 60 volumes percent! If polycythemia is severe, the probability of a successful pregnancy outcome is low. This is a primary clonal myeloproliferative hemopoietic stemcell disorder characterized by excessive proliferation of erythroid, myeloid, and megakaryocytic precursors (Spivak, 2015; Vannucchi, 2015).
Endocrinologic issues: Diabetes mellitus (DM), hypothyroidism, progeste rone def ciency. Environmental factors: Tobacco (with > 14 cigarettes/day, the risk is twofold), alcohol, caffeine (> 500 mg caffeine/day), toxins, drugs, radiation. Fetal factors: Anatomic malformation. See Table 2.11-6 for types of SAB. ■↓ levels of hCG. Ultrasound:

Can identify the gestational sac 5–6 weeks from the LMP, a fetal pole at six weeks, and fetal cardiac activity at 6–7 weeks. With accurate dating, a small, irregular intrauterine sac without a fetal pole on transvaginal ultrasound is diagnostic of an abnormal pregnancy. Maternal Rh type should be determined and RhoGAM given if the type is Rh . It has been estimated that 50% of all pregnancies in the United States are unintended. Some 25% of all pregnancies end in elective abortion. Options for elective abortion depend on GA and patient preferences (see Table 2.11-7). Leopold’s maneuvers are used to determine fetal lie (longitudinal or transverse) and, if possible, fetal presentation (breech or cephalic). Cervical examination:

Evaluate dilation, effacement, station, cervical position, and cervical consistency. Use the Bishop score (see Table 2.11-8) to evaluate the favorability of delivery and the probability of succeeding with an induction. Scoring is interpreted as follows: 0–4: Indicates a 45–50% chance of failure.
A diagnosis of Cushing’s should be considered when several clinical features are found in the same patient, in particular when more specific features are found. These include fragility of the skin, with easy bruising and broad (>1 cm), purplish striae (Fig. 406-9), and signs of proximal myopathy, which becomes most obvious when trying to stand up from a chair without the use of hands or when climbing stairs. Clinical manifestations of Cushing’s do not differ substantially among the different causes of Cushing’s. In ectopic ACTH syndrome, hyperpigmentation of the knuckles, scars, or skin areas exposed to increased friction can be observed (Fig. 406-9) and is caused by stimulatory effects of excess ACTH and other POMC cleavage products on melanocyte pigment production. Furthermore, patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome, and some with adrenocortical carcinoma as the cause of Cushing’s, may have a more brisk onset and rapid progression of clinical signs and symptoms. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome can be acutely endangered by deep vein thrombosis, with subsequent pulmonary embolism due to a hypercoagulable state associated with Cushing’s. The majority of patients also experience psychiatric symptoms, mostly in the form of anxiety or depression, but acute paranoid or depressive psychosis

FIGURE 406-9 Clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome. A. Note central obesity and broad, purple stretch marks (B. close-up). C. Note thin and brittle skin in an elderly patient with Cushing’s syndrome. D. Hyperpigmentation of the knuckles in a patient with ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) excess. Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex 2316 may also occur. Even after cure, long-term health may be affected by A diagnosis of Cushing’s can be considered as established if the persistently impaired health-related quality of life and increased risk results of several tests are consistently suggestive of Cushing’s.
A major exception to this insidious onset is Cushing syndrome associated with small-cell carcinomas of the lung, when the rapid course of the underlying disease precludes development of many of the characteristic features. Early manifestations of Cushing syndrome include hypertension and weight gain. With time, the more characteristic centripetal redistribution of adipose tissue becomes apparent, with resultant truncal obesity, “moon facies,” and accumulation of fat in the posterior neck and back (“buffalo hump”). Hypercortisolism causes selective atrophy of fast-twitch (type II) myofibers, with resultant decreased muscle mass and proximal limb weakness. Glucocorticoids induce gluconeogenesis and inhibit the uptake of glucose by cells, resulting in secondary diabetes with its attendant hyperglycemia, glucosuria, and polydipsia. The catabolic effects of insulin resistance on proteins cause loss of collagen. Thus, the skin is thin, fragile, and easily bruised; cutaneous striae are particularly common in the abdominal area (

Fig. 20.38 ). Cortisol also has diverse effects on calcium metabolism that lead to resorption of bone, which results in the development of osteoporosis, with consequent increased susceptibility to fractures. Because glucocorticoids suppress the immune response, patients with Cushing syndrome also are at increased risk for a variety of infections. Additional manifestations include hirsutism and menstrual abnormalities, as well as a number of psychiatric symptoms including mood swings, depression, and frank psychosis. Extraadrenal Cushing syndrome caused by pituitary or ectopic ACTH secretion usually is associated with increased skin pigmentation secondary to melanocyte-stimulating activity in the ACTH precursor molecule. Fig.20.37Adrenocorticaladenoma.(A)Theadenomaisdistinguishedfromnodularhyperplasiabyitssolitary,circumscribednature.Thefunctionalstatusofanadrenocorticaladenomacannotbepredictedfromitsgrossormicroscopicappearance.(B)Histologicfeaturesofanadrenalcorticaladenoma.Theneoplasticcellsarevacuolatedbecauseofthepresenceofintracytoplasmiclipid.Thereismildnuclearpleomorphism.Mitoticactivityandnecrosisarenotseen. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.38ApatientwithCushingsyndrome.Characteristicfeaturesincludecentralobesity,“moonfacies,”andabdominalstriae. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Lloyd RV, et al: Atlasofnontumorpathology:endocrinediseases.Washington, DC, American Registry of Pathology, 2002.)
In patients with primary adrenal disease, increased levels of ACTH precursor hormone stimulate melanocytes, with resultant hyperpigmentation of the skin and mucosal surfaces. The face, axillae, nipples, areolae, and perineum are particularly common sites of hyperpigmentation. By contrast, hyperpigmentation is not seen in patients with secondary adrenocortical insufficiency because melanotropic hormone levels are not increased. Decreased mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) activity in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency results in potassium retention and sodium loss, with consequent hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, volume depletion, and hypotension, whereas secondary hypoadrenalism is characterized by deficient cortisol and androgen output but normal or near-normal aldosterone synthesis. Hypoglycemia occasionally may occur as a result of glucocorticoid deficiency and impaired gluconeogenesis. It is more common in infants and children than adults. Stresses such as infections, trauma, or surgical procedures in affected patients may precipitate an acute adrenal crisis, manifested by intractable vomiting, abdominal pain, hypotension, coma, and vascular collapse. Death follows rapidly unless corticosteroids are replaced immediately. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.41Autoimmuneadrenalitis.Inadditiontolossofallbutasubcapsularrimofcorticalcells,thereisanextensivemononuclearcellinfiltrate. Primaryadrenocorticalinsufficiencycanbeacute(Waterhouse-Friderichsensyndrome)orchronic(Addisondisease). ChronicadrenalinsufficiencyintheWesternworldmostoftenissecondarytoautoimmuneadrenalitis,whichoccursinthecontextofautoimmunepolyendocrinesyndromes. Tuberculosisandinfectionsduetoopportunisticpathogensassociatedwiththehumanimmunodeficiencyvirusandtumorsmetastatictotheadrenalsaretheotherimportantcausesofchronichypoadrenalism. Patientstypicallypresentwithfatigue,weakness,andgastrointestinaldisturbances.PrimaryadrenocorticalinsufficiencyalsoischaracterizedbyhighACTHlevelswithassociatedskinpigmentation. It should be evident from the discussion of adrenocortical hyperfunction that functional adrenal neoplasms may be responsible for any of the various forms of hyperadrenalism. While functional adenomas are most commonly associated with hyperaldosteronism and with Cushing syndrome, a virilizing neoplasm is more likely to be a carcinoma.
Among fungi, disseminated infections caused by Histoplasma capsulatum and Coccidioides immitis also may result in chronic adrenocortical insufficiency. Patients with AIDS are at risk for the development of adrenal insufficiency from several other infectious (cytomegalovirus, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare) and noninfectious (Kaposi sarcoma) complications of their disease. • Metastatic neoplasms involving the adrenals are another potential cause of adrenal insufficiency. The adrenals are a fairly common site for metastases in patients with disseminated carcinomas, which sometimes destroy sufficient adrenal cortex to produce a degree of adrenal insufficiency. Carcinomas of the lung and breast are the source of a majority of metastases in the adrenals. Any disorder of the hypothalamus and pituitary that reduces the output of ACTH, such as metastatic cancer, infection, infarction, or irradiation, leads to a syndrome of hypoadrenalism having many similarities to Addison disease. ACTH deficiency may occur alone, but in some instances, it is only one part of panhypopituitarism, associated with multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies. In patients with primary disease, the destruction of the adrenal cortex prevents a response to exogenously administered ACTH in the form of increased plasma levels of cortisol. By contrast, secondary adrenocortical insufficiency is characterized by low serum ACTH and a prompt rise in plasma cortisol levels in response to ACTH administration. MORPHOLOGYTheappearanceoftheadrenalglandsvarieswiththecauseoftheadrenocorticalinsufficiency.Insecondaryhypoadrenalism,theadrenalsarereducedtosmall,flattenedstructuresthatusuallyretaintheiryellowcolorbecauseofasmallamountofresiduallipid.Auniform,thinrimofatrophicyellowcortexsurroundsacentral,intactmedulla.Histologicevaluationrevealsatrophyofcorticalcellswithlossofcytoplasmiclipid,particularlyinthezonafasciculataandzonareticularis.Primaryautoimmuneadrenalitisischaracterizedbyirregularlyshrunkenglands,whichmaybeexceedinglydifficulttoidentifywithinthesuprarenaladiposetissue.Onhistologicexamination,thecortexcontainsonlyscatteredresidualcorticalcellsinacollapsednetworkofconnectivetissue.Avariablelymphoidinfiltrateispresentinthecortexandmayextendintothesubjacentmedulla(

Fig.20.41 ).Themedullaisotherwisepreserved.Intuberculosisorfungaldiseases,theadrenalarchitecturemaybeeffacedbyagranulomatousinflammatoryreactionidenticaltothatencounteredinothersitesofinfection.Whenhypoadrenalismiscausedbymetastaticcarcinoma,theadrenalsareenlarged,andtheirnormalarchitectureisobscuredbytheinfiltratingneoplasm. In general, clinical manifestations of adrenocortical insufficiency do not appear until at least 90% of the adrenal cortex has been compromised. The initial manifestations often include progressive weakness and easy fatigability, which may be dismissed as nonspecific complaints. Gastrointestinal disturbances are common and include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, and diarrhea. In patients with primary adrenal disease, increased levels of ACTH precursor hormone stimulate melanocytes, with resultant hyperpigmentation of the skin and mucosal surfaces. The face, axillae, nipples, areolae, and perineum are particularly common sites of hyperpigmentation.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
JAMA 205:85, 1968. Bernat JL: Chronic disorders of consciousness. Lancet 367:1181, 2006. Booth CM, Boone RH, Tomlinson G, Detsky AS: Is this patient dead, vegetative, or severely impaired? JAMA 291:870, 2004. Braakman R, Jennett WB, Minderhound JM: Prognosis of the post-traumatic vegetative state. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 95:49, 1988. Bremer F: L’activité cerebralé au cours du sommeil et de la narcose. Bull Acad R Soc Belg 2:68, 1937. Brown N, Lydic R, Schiff ND: General anesthesia, sleep, and coma. N Engl J Med 363:2638, 2010. Cairns H, Oldfield RC, Pennybacker JB, et al: Akinetic mutism with an epidermoid cyst of the third ventricle. Brain 64:273, 1941. Campagna JA, Miller KW, Forman SA: Mechanisms of actions of inhaled anesthetics. N Engl J Med 348:2210, 2003.
Severe: Episodes nightly. N ightmures are typically lengthy, elaborate, storylike sequences of dream imagery that seem real and that incite anxiety, fear, or other dysphoric emotions. Nightmare content typically focuses on attempts to avoid or cope with imminent danger but may involve themes that evoke other negative emotions. Nightmares occurring after traumatic experi- ences may replicate the threatening situation ("replicative nightmares”), but most do not. On awakening, nightmares are well remembered and can be described in detail. They arise out sleep but are more likely in the second half of the major sleep episode when dreaming is longer and mdre intense. Factors that increase early-night REM intensity, such as sleep fragmentation or deprivation, jet lag, and REM-sensitive medications, might facilitate nightmares earlier in the night, including at sleep onset. Nightmares usually terminate with awakening and rapid return of full alertness. How- ever, the dysphoric emotions may persist into wakefulness and contribute to difficulty re- turning to sleep and lasting daytime distress. Some nightmares, known as ”bad dreams,” may not induce awakening and are recalled only later. If nightmares occur during sleep- onset REM periods (hypnagogic), the dysphoric emotion is frequently accompanied by a sense of being both awake and unable to move voluntarily (isolated sleep paralysis). Mild autonomic arousal, including sweating, tachycardia, and tachypnea, may character- ize nightmares. Body movements and vocalizations are not characteristic because of REM sleep—related loss of skeletal muscle tone, but such behaviors may occur under situations of emotional stress or sleep fragmentation and in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). When talking or emoting occurs, it is typically a brief event terminating the nightmare. Individuals with frequent nightmares are at substantially greater risk for suicidal ide- ation and suicide attempts, even when gender and mental illness are taken into account.
Legal reporting requirements vary from state to state, but at a minimum, physicians should inform sleepy patients about their increased risk of having an accident and advise such patients not to drive a motor vehicle until the sleepiness has been treated effectively. This discussion is especially important for professional drivers, and it should be documented in the patient’s medical record. Insufficient sleep is probably the most common cause of excessive daytime sleepiness. The average adult needs 7.5–8 h of sleep, but on

Difficulty waking in the morning, rebound sleep on weekends and vacations with improvement in sleepiness

Obesity, snoring, hypertension

Cataplexy, hypnogogic hallucinations, sleep paralysis

Restless legs, kicking movements during sleep

Sedating medications, stimulant withdrawal, head trauma, systemic inflammation, Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, hypothyroidism, encephalopathy weeknights, the average U.S. adult gets only 6.75 h of sleep. Only 30% of the U.S. adult population reports consistently obtaining sufficient sleep. Insufficient sleep is especially common among shift workers, individuals working multiple jobs, and people in lower socioeconomic groups. Most teenagers need ≥9 h of sleep, but many fail to get enough sleep because of circadian phase delay, or social pressures to stay up late coupled with early school start times. Late evening light exposure, television viewing, video-gaming, social media, texting, and smart-phone use often delay bedtimes despite the fixed, early wake times required for work or school. As is typical with any disorder that causes sleepiness, individuals with chronically insufficient sleep may feel inattentive, irritable, unmotivated, and depressed, and have difficulty with school, work, and driving. Individuals differ in their optimal amount of sleep, and it can be helpful to ask how much sleep the patient obtains on a quiet vacation when he or she can sleep without restrictions. Some patients may think that a short amount of sleep is normal or advantageous, and they may not appreciate their biological need for more sleep, especially if coffee and other stimulants mask the sleepiness. A 2-week sleep log documenting the timing of sleep and daily level of alertness is diagnostically useful and provides helpful feedback for the patient. Extending sleep to the optimal amount on a regular basis can resolve the sleepiness and other symptoms. As with any lifestyle change, extending sleep requires commitment and adjustments, but the improvements in daytime alertness make this change worthwhile. Respiratory dysfunction during sleep is a common, serious cause of excessive daytime sleepiness as well as of disturbed nocturnal sleep.
The blood supply to the femoral head is from three sources—the artery within the ligament of the head of the femur, vessels in the medullary cavity, and vessels deep to the synovium running in the retinacula of the fibrous capsule of the hip joint. With increasing age, the medullary cavity undergoes fatty replacement of the normal red marrow, thus attenuating the medullary blood supply. The artery within the ligament of the head of the femur also becomes attenuated and this is often associated with atherosclerotic arterial disease. Unfortunately for this patient, the sole blood supply to the head of the femur was via the vessels in the retinacula fibers, which were transected at the time of the fracture. If the patient had an intertrochanteric fracture instead, the vessels of the retinacula fibers would not have been damaged and a different approach to surgical fixation could be undertaken without the need for a hemiarthroplasty. The patient has osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a common condition affecting older people, but is significantly more frequent in postmenopausal women. Many fractures of the femoral neck in elderly patients occur because the strength of the bone is significantly reduced when it is osteoporotic. Other common sites for osteoporotic fractures include the distal radius and the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. A 28-year-old woman was seen by her family practitioner for a routine pregnancy checkup at 36 weeks’ gestational age. Neither the patient nor the family physician had any concerns about the pregnancy. However, the patient did complain of unilateral swelling of her left leg, which had gradually increased over the previous 2 days. Furthermore, the evening before her visit she developed some sharp chest pain, which was exacerbated by deep breaths. The family physician ordered a duplex ultrasound scan of the left leg venous system. Ultrasound scanning of the vascular tree can demonstrate flow and occlusion of arteries and veins.
Neurology 30:683, 1980. Annegers JF, Hauser A, Coan SP, Rocca WA: A population-based study of seizures after traumatic brain injuries. N Engl J Med 338:20, 1998. Ascroft RB: Traumatic epilepsy after gunshot wounds of the head. Br Med J 1:739, 1941. Baugley IJ, Nicholls JL, Felmingham KL, et al: Dysautonomia after traumatic brain injury: A forgotten syndrome. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 67:39, 1999. Bender MB, Christoff N: Nonsurgical treatment of subdural hematomas. Arch Neurol 31:73, 1974. Bonnier C, Nassogne MC, Saint-Martin C, et al: Neuroimaging of intraparenchymal lesions predicts outcome in shaken baby syndrome. Pediatrics 112:808, 2003. Boto GR, Lobato RD, Rivas JJ, et al: Basal ganglia hematomas in severely head injured patients: Clinicoradiological analysis of 37 cases. J Neurosurg 94:224, 2001. Bowman KM, Blau A, Reich R: Psychiatric states following head injury in adults and children. In: Feiring EH (ed): Brock’s Injuries of the Brain and Spinal Cord and Their Coverings, 5th ed.
2. Environmental toxicology—Organophosphorus pesticides are not considered to be persistent pesticides. They are relatively unstable and break down in the environment as a result of hydrolysis and photolysis. As a class they are considered to have a small permanent impact on the environment, in spite of their acute effects on organisms. These compounds (Table 56–4) inhibit acetylcholinesterase by carbamoylation of the esteratic site. Thus, they possess the toxic properties associated with inhibition of this enzyme as described

TABLE 56–4 Carbamate pesticides. 1Toxicity rating: Probable human oral lethal dosage for class 4 = 50−500 mg/kg, class 5 = 5−50 mg/kg, and class 6 = ≤ 5 mg/kg. (See Gosselin et al, 1984.) 2ADI, acceptable daily intake (mg/kg/d), data not found. for the organophosphorus pesticides. However, as described in Chapters 7 and 8, the binding is relatively weak, dissociation occurs after minutes to hours, and clinical effects are of shorter duration than those observed with organophosphorus compounds. Spontaneous reactivation of cholinesterase is more rapid after inhibition by the carbamates. The therapeutic index, the ratio of the doses that cause severe toxicity or death to those that result in minor intoxication, is larger with carbamates than with the organophosphorus agents. Although the clinical approach to carbamate poisoning is similar to that for organophosphates, the use of pralidoxime is not recommended. The carbamates are considered to be nonpersistent pesticides.
Mol Genet Metab 112(2):87,s2014

Cao A, Kan W: he prevention of thalassemia. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 3(2):aOll775, 2013

Cassina M, Dilaghi A, Di Gianantonio E, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women exposed to antiepileptic drugs: teratogenic role of maternal epilepsy and its pharmacologic treatment. Reprod ToxicoI39:50, 2013

Cedars MI: Introduction: childhood implications of parental aging. Fertil Steril 103(6):1379,s2015

Center� for Disease Control and Prevention: Women and smoking. 2014. AvaIlable at: http://www.cdc.gov/ tobaccol data_statisticsl sgrl50th-anniversary/pdfs/fs_women_smokin�508.pdf. Accessed April 5, 2016

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Preconception health and health care. 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/preconception/index.html. Accessed April 5,s2016

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Birth defects. 2016. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/data.html. Accessed April 5, 2016 Cheng 0, Horon IL: Intimate-partner homicide among pregnant and postpar tum women. Obstet GynecoIsI15(6):1l81, 2010

Cox M, Whittle M], Byrne A, et al: Prep regnancy counseling: experience from 10 5 cases. B]OG 99:873, 1992 Creanga A, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortaliry in the United States, 2006-2010.
Occup Med 1993;8:519. Soderlund DM et al: Mechanisms of pyrethroid neurotoxicity: Implications for cumulative risk assessment. Toxicology 2002;171:3. St Hilaire S et al: Estrogen receptor positive breast cancers and their association with environmental factors. Int J Health Geogr 2011;10:10. Storm JE, Rozman KK, Doull J: Occupational exposure limits for 30 organophosphate pesticides based on inhibition of red blood cell acetylcholinesterase. Toxicology 2000;150:1. Trabert B et al: Maternal pregnancy levels of trans-nonachlor and oxychlordane and prevalence of cryptorchidism and hypospadias in boys. Environ Health Perspect 2012;120:478. Vieira VM, et al: Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and cancer outcomes in a contaminated community: A geographic analysis. Environ Health Perspect 2013;121:318. Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental 1019

Warheit DB: How to measure hazards/risks following exposures to nanoscale or pigment-grade titanium dioxide particles. Toxicol Lett 2013; 220:193. Warner M et al: Diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and obesity in relation to serum dioxin concentrations: The Seveso women’s health study. Environ Health Perspect 2013;121:906.
Pediatrics 93(2):211, 1994

Pryde PG, Sedman AB, Nugent CE, et al: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor fetopathy. J Am Soc NephroIo3(9):1575, 1993

Rasanen J, Jouppila P: Fetal cardiac function and ductus arteriosus during indomethacin and sulindac therapy for threatened preterm labor: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173(1):20, 1995

Reefhuis J, Gilboa SM, Anderka M, et al: The National Birth Defects Prevention Study: a review of the methods. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(8):656,o2015

Richardson S, Browne ML, Rasmussen SA, et al: Associations between periconceptional alcohol consumption and craniosynostosis, omphalocele, and gastroschisis. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 91 (7):623,2011

Rocheleau CM, Bertke SJ, Lawson CC, et al: Maternal occupational pesticide exposure and risk of congenital heart defects in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratolo103(1 0):823,2015 Rothman KJ, Moore LL, Singer MR, et al: Teratogenicity of high vitamin A intake. N Engl J Med 333(21):1369, 1995 Sadler W (ed): Langman's Medical Embryology, 6th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1990, p 130

Salle B, Sergeant P, Awada A, et al: Transvaginal ultrasound studies of vascular and morphological changes in uteri exposed to diethylstilbestrol in utero. Hum Reprod 11(11):2531, 1996

Sanofi-Aventis: Arava (Lelunomide) prescribing information, 20o16. Available at: http://products.sanoi.us/arava/arava.htmll. Accessed September 24, 2017 Schardein JL: Congenital abnormalities and hormones during pregnancy: a clinical review. Teratology 22(3):251,o1980

Sebela Pharmaceuticals: Pexeva (Paroxetine) prescribing information, 2017. Available at: ww.pexeva.com/pdf/Pexeva_20140728_ver .pd. Accessed September 24, 2017

Sheehan DM: Herbal medicines, phytoestrogens and toxicity: risk:beneit considerations. Proc Soc Exp BioI Med 21 (3):379, 1998

Shepard TH: Annual commentary on human teratogens.
There are, however, important quantitative differences between the various derivatives; DDT in solution is poorly absorbed through the skin, whereas dieldrin absorption from the skin is very efficient. Organochlorine pesticides have largely been abandoned because they cause severe environmental damage. They are now known to be endocrine disrupters in animals and humans. DDT continues to have very restricted use for domestic mosquito elimination in malaria-infested areas of Africa. This use is controversial, but it is very effective and is likely to remain in place for the foreseeable future. Organochlorine pesticide residues in humans, animals, and the environment present long-term problems that are not yet fully understood. 1. Human toxicology—The acute toxic properties of all the organochlorine pesticides in humans are qualitatively similar. These agents interfere with inactivation of the sodium channel in excitable membranes and cause rapid repetitive firing in most neurons. Calcium ion transport is inhibited. These events affect repolarization and enhance the excitability of neurons. The major effect is CNS stimulation. With DDT, tremor may be the first manifestation, possibly continuing to convulsions, whereas with the other compounds convulsions often appear as the first sign of intoxication. There is no specific treatment for the acute intoxicated state, and management is symptomatic. The potential carcinogenic properties of organochlorine pesticides have been extensively studied, and results indicate that 1Toxicity rating: Probable human oral lethal dosage for class 3 = 500−5000 mg/kg, class 4 = 50−500 mg/kg, and class 5 = 5−50 mg/kg.
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
Patients with these conditions may deteriorate rapidly despite initially appearing well. The remaining population with non-cardiopulmonary conditions has a more favorable prognosis during completion of the diagnostic work-up. A rapid targeted assessment for a serious cardiopulmonary cause is of particular relevance for patients with acute ongoing pain who have presented for emergency evaluation. Among patients presenting in the outpatient setting with chronic pain or pain that has resolved, a general diagnostic assessment is reasonably undertaken (see “Outpatient Evaluation of Chest Discomfort,” below). A series of questions that can be used to structure the clinical evaluation of patients with chest discomfort is shown in Table 19-2. 1. Could the chest discomfort be due to an acute, potentially life-threatening condition that warrants urgent evaluation and management? 2. If not, could the discomfort be due to a chronic condition likely to lead to serious complications? 3. If not, could the discomfort be due to an acute condition that warrants specific treatment? 4. If not, could the discomfort be due to another treatable chronic condition? Esophageal reflux Cervical disk disease Esophageal spasm Arthritis of the shoulder or spine Peptic ulcer disease Costochondritis Gallbladder disease Other musculoskeletal disorders Other gastrointestinal conditions Anxiety state

Source: Developed by Dr. Thomas H. Lee for the 18th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. The evaluation of nontraumatic chest discomfort relies heavily on the clinical history and physical examination to direct subsequent diagnostic testing.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
His profuse sweating was typical and partly due to α1 receptors, although the large magnitude of drenching sweats in pheochromocytoma has never been fully explained. Treatment would consist of preoperative pharma-cologic control of blood pressure and normalization of blood volume if reduced, followed by surgical resection of the tumor. Control of blood pressure extremes might be necessary during surgery, probably with nitroprusside. Neal L. Benowitz, MD

A 35-year-old man presents with a blood pressure of 150/95 mm Hg. He has been generally healthy, is sedentary, drinks several cocktails per day, and does not smoke cigarettes. He has a family history of hypertension, and his father died of a myocardial infarction at age 55. Physical examination is remarkable only for moderate obesity. Total cholesterol is 220, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level is 40 mg/dL. Fasting glucose is 105 mg/dL. Chest X-ray is normal. Electrocardiogram shows left ven-tricular enlargement. How would you treat this patient? Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular disease. In a National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) carried out in 2011 to 2012, hypertension was found in 29% of American adults and 65% of adults age 65 years or older. The prevalence varies with age, race, education, and many other variables.
Glomerulonephritis with deafness. Glomerulonephritis with hemoptysis. Presence of red cell casts in urine sediment. Eosinophils in urine sediment. Waxy casts in urine sediment and Maltese crosses (seen with lipiduria). Drowsiness, asterixis, nausea, and a pericardial friction rub. A 55-year-old man is diagnosed with prostate cancer. Treatment options? Low urine specific gravity in the presence of high serum osmolality. Treatment of SIADH? Hematuria, ﬂank pain, and palpable ﬂank mass. Testicular cancer associated with β-hCG, AFP. The most common type of testicular cancer. The most common histology of bladder cancer. Complication of overly rapid correction of hyponatremia.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Pharmacol Rev 2010;62:405. Anthony J. Trevor, PhD not overweight, and she takes no prescription drugs. She drinks decaffeinated coffee but only one cup in the morning; however, she drinks as many as six cans per day of diet cola. She drinks a glass of wine with her evening meal but does not like stronger spirits. What other aspects of this patient’s history would you like to know? What therapeutic measures are appropriate for this patient? What drug, or drugs, (if any) would you prescribe? At her annual physical examination, a 53-year-old middle school teacher complains that she has been having difficulty falling asleep, and after falling asleep, she awakens several times during the night. These episodes now occur almost nightly and are interfering with her ability to teach. She has tried various over-the-counter sleep remedies, but they were of little help and she experienced “hangover” effects on the day following their use. Her general health is good, she is

Assignment of a drug to the sedative-hypnotic class indicates that it is able to cause sedation (with concomitant relief of anxiety) or to encourage sleep (hypnosis). Because there is considerable chemical variation within the group, this drug classification is based on clinical uses rather than on similarities in chemical structure. Anxiety states and sleep disorders are common problems, and sedative-hypnotics are widely prescribed drugs worldwide. An effective sedative (anxiolytic) agent should reduce anxiety and exert a calming effect. The degree of central nervous system (CNS) depression caused by a sedative should be the minimum consistent with therapeutic efficacy.
Holma KM et al: Long-term outcome of major depressive disorder in psychiatric patients is variable. J Clin Psychiatry 2008;69:196. Jann MW, Slade JH: Antidepressant agents for the treatment of chronic pain and depression. Pharmacotherapy 2007;27:1571. Kalia M: Neurobiological basis of depression: An update. Metabolism 2005;54 (5 Suppl 1):24. Kozisek ME, Middlemas D, Bylund DB: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and its receptor tropomyosin-related kinase B in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Pharmacol Ther 2008;117:30. Krystal JH, Sanacora G, Duman RS: Rapid-acting glutamatergic antidepressants: The path to ketamine and beyond. Biol Psychiatry 2013;73:1133. Laughren TP et al: Vilazodone: Clinical basis for the US Food and Drug Administration’s approval of a new antidepressant. J Clin Psychiatry 2011;72:1166. Lesch KP, Gutknecht L: Pharmacogenetics of the serotonin transporter. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005;29:1062. Mago R et al: Safety and tolerability of levomilnacipran ER in major depressive disorder: Results from an open-label, 48-week extension study.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
D’Amico JM et al: Constitutively active 5-HT2/α1 receptors facilitate muscle spasms after human spinal cord injury. J Neurophysiol 2013; 109:1473. Elangbam CS: Drug-induced valvulopathy: An update. Toxicol Path 2010; 38:837. Frank C: Recognition and treatment of serotonin syndrome. Can Fam Physician 2008;54:988. Jaspers L et al: Efficacy and safety of flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in women. A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:453. Katus LE, Frucht SJ: Management of serotonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2016;18:39. Loder E: Triptan therapy in migraine. N Engl J Med 2010;363:63. Porvasnik SL et al: PRX-08066, a novel 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2B antagonist, reduces monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy in rats. J Pharmacol Exp Therap 2010; 334:364.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
55-2). Many physicians treat moderately to severely ill patients with febrile dysentery empirically without diagnostic evaluation using a quinolone, such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid for 3–5 d). Empirical treatment can also be considered for suspected giardiasis with metronidazole (250 mg qid for 7 d). Selection of antibiotics and dosage regimens are otherwise dictated by specific pathogens, geographic patterns of resistance, and conditions found (Chaps. 160, 186, and 190–196). Antibiotic coverage is indicated, whether or not a causative organism is discovered, in patients who are immunocompromised, have mechanical heart valves or recent vascular grafts, or are elderly. Bismuth subsalicylate may reduce the frequency of traveler’s diarrhea. Antibiotic prophylaxis is only indicated for certain patients traveling to high-risk countries in whom the likelihood or seriousness of acquired diarrhea would be especially high, including those with immunocompromise, IBD, hemochromatosis, or gastric achlorhydria. Use of ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, or rifaximin may reduce bacterial diarrhea in such travelers by 90%, though rifaximin is not suitable for invasive disease, but rather as treatment for uncomplicated traveler’s diarrhea. Finally, physicians should be vigilant to identify if an outbreak of diarrheal illness is occurring and to alert the public health authorities promptly. This may reduce the ultimate size of the affected population. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying pathology. In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea are noninfectious. The classification of chronic diarrhea by pathophysiologic mechanism facilitates a rational approach to management, although many diseases cause diarrhea by more than one mechanism (Table 55-3). Secretory Causes Secretory diarrheas are due to derangements in fluid and electrolyte transport across the enterocolonic mucosa.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
While myoclonic activity with seizures in this age group raises concern of a serious condition, there is a common benign form with a heritable component and does not lead to developmental delay. A number of focal epilepsies may appear for the first time during this age period and carry a good prognosis, that is, the neurologic and intellectual capacities remain relatively unimpaired and seizures may cease in adolescence. These disorders begin between 3 and 13 years of age and there is often a familial predisposition. Most are marked by distinctive focal spike activity that is accentuated by sleep (see earlier, in reference to benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal or occipital spikes). Several of these have been discussed earlier under the “Special Epileptic Syndromes.” In one form, benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, unilateral tonic or clonic contractions of the face and limbs recur repeatedly with or without paresthesia; anarthria may follow the seizure. There are central and temporal spikes in the EEG interictally. Less commonly, the focus originates in an occipital lobe with EEG spiking on eye closure. An acquired aphasia characterizes another disorder that was described by Landau and Kleffner to mark the beginning of an illness in which there are partial or generalized motor seizures and multifocal spike or spike-and-wave discharges in the EEG and deterioration of language function. As in any age group, there are structural causes of seizures that include medial temporal sclerosis, described in several places in this chapter, tumor and arteriovenous malformation. The special case of Rasmussen encephalitis and intractable seizures has already been discussed under the “Special Epileptic Syndromes.”

Among the generalized idiopathic epilepsies, the typical absence disorder, with its regularly recurring 3-per-second spike-and-wave EEG abnormality, begins in this age period (rarely before age 4 years) and carries a good prognosis. This seizure disorder responds well to medications, as indicated further on. Its features are fully described in “Absence Variants.”

Convulsions in this age group may present around the age of 4 years as focal myoclonus with or without astatic seizures, atypical absence, or generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The EEG, repeated if initially normal, is most helpful in diagnosis; it reveals a paroxysmal 2to 2.5-per-second spike-and-wave pattern on a background of predominant 4to 7-Hz slow waves. Many of these cases qualify as the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, are difficult to treat, and are likely to be associated with developmental delay. At this age, perhaps more than any other, the first burst of seizures may take the form of status epilepticus and, if not successfully controlled, may end fatally.
Mesulam MM: Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia. Ann Neurol 11:592, 1982. Miller RG, Jackson CE, Kasarskis EJ, et al: Practice parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Multidisciplinary care, symptom management, and cognitive/behavioral impairment (an evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the

American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 73:1227, 2009a. Miller RG, Jackson CE, Kasarskis EJ, et al: Practice parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Drug, nutritional, and respiratory therapies (an evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 73:1218, 2009b. Mollaret P: La Maladie de Friedreich. Paris, Legrand, 1929. Moreno Martinez JM, Garcia de la Rocha ML, Martin Araquez A: Monomelic segmental amyotrophy: A Spanish case involving the leg. Rev Neurol (Paris) 146:443, 1990. Mulder DW, Kurland LT, Offord KP, Beard CM: Familial adult motor neuron disease: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 36:511, 1986. Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration: Mutations in COQ2 in familial and sporadic multiple-system atrophy. N Engl J Med 369:233, 2013. Murata Y, Yamaguchi S, Kawakami H: Characteristic magnetic resonance imaging findings in Machado-Joseph disease.
Serumceruloplasmin levels are low. Abnormal copper deposition isfound in the liver, producing cirrhosis; in the peripheral cornea, producing a characteristic green-brown (Kayser-Fleischer)ring; and in the CNS, producing neuronal degeneration andprotoplasmic astrocytosis. Neurologic symptoms characteristically begin in the early teenage years with dysarthria, dysphasia,drooling, fixed smile, tremor, dystonia, and emotional lability.MRI shows abnormalities of the basal ganglia. Treatment is witha copper-chelating agent, such as oral penicillamine. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy, or Leigh disease, is a neuropathologically defined, degenerative inherited CNS disease primarily involving the periaqueductal region of the brainstem, caudate, and putamen. Symptoms usually begin before 2 years of age and consist of hypotonia, feeding difficulties, respiratory irregularity, weakness of extraocular movements, and ataxia. Blood and CSF lactate and pyruvate levels are elevated. Several alterations of mitochondrial function produce this clinical syndrome. Children with poorly controlled epilepsy may be continuously in either an ictal or a postictal state and may appearstuporous because of their epileptic encephalopathy. Antiepileptic drugs that are sedating or affect mood, memory,motivation, or attention may contribute to the lack or lossof developmental abilities and school failure. Use of highdoses or multiple anticonvulsants may compound thisproblem. Chronic drug use or overuse (sedatives, tranquilizers, anticholinergics) can bring about progressive confusion, lethargy, and ataxia. Intoxications with heavy metals, such as lead, may cause chronic learning difficulties or may present acutely with irritability, listlessness, anorexia, and pallor, progressing to fulminant encephalopathy. Vitamin deficiency of thiamine, niacin, vitamin B12, and vitamin E can produce encephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and ataxia. Congenital and acquired hypothyroidism impairs cognition and retards developmental progress.
Some patients may need prolonged EEG monitoring, either in the hospital or with portable equipment at home. In all forms of epilepsy, prolonged EEG and video monitoring in a hospital unit may prove diagnostic. (Table 15-4 and Fig. 15-5)

Having concluded that the neurologic disturbance under consideration is one of seizure, the next issue is to identify its type. Indeed, in most cases this determines the nature of treatment. Because there are so many seizure types, especially in childhood and adolescence, each one tending to predominate in a certain age period, a clinical advantage accrues to considering seizures from just this point of view. A broader approach includes consideration of the neurologic and EEG findings, the response to drugs, etiology, and prognosis. Figure 15-5 displays the frequency of each seizure type and the main causes of seizures by age group. These data are assembled from various sources and are approximate, but they highlight several points of clinical importance. The neonatologist is often confronted by an infant who begins to convulse in the first days of life. In most instances, the seizures are fragmentary—an abrupt movement or posturing of a limb, stiffening of the body, rolling up of the eyes, a pause in respirations, lip-smacking, chewing, or bicycling movements of the legs. Even the experienced observer may have difficulty at times in distinguishing seizure activity from the normal movements of the neonate. If manifest seizures are frequent and stereotyped, the diagnosis is less difficult. The seizures correlate with focal or multifocal cortical discharges; however, as is the case with most EEG changes in neonates, these are poorly formed and less distinct than seizure discharges in later life. Presumably the immaturity of the cerebrum prevents the development of a fully organized seizure pattern, and the incomplete corticocortical myelination prevents bihemispheric spread.
Genital tract evaluation and specimens should be obtained with regional inguinal lymphadenopathy (see Chapter 116). Screening for tuberculosis can be performed using the standard tuberculin skin test or an interferon gamma release assay; both may be positive with atypical mycobacterial infection. Aspiration is indicated for acutely inflamed, fluctuant cervical lymph nodes, especially those larger than 3 cm in diameter or not responding to antibiotic treatment. Ultrasound orcomputed tomography may help in establishing the extent oflymphadenopathy and defining whether the mass is solid, cystic, or suppurative with abscess formation. Pus from fluctuantlesions should be examined by Gram and acid-fast stains andcultured for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and mycobacteria. Biopsy should be performed if lymphoma is suspectedbecause of firm, matted, nontender nodes and other systemicfindings. If the diagnosis remains uncertain and lymphadenopathy persists despite empirical antibiotic therapy for presumed S. aureus and group A streptococcus, excisional biopsy of the entire node should be performed, if possible. This is curative for nontuberculous mycobacterial lymphadenitis. Biopsy material should be submitted for histopathology as well as Gram, acid-fast, Giemsa, periodic acid-Schiff, Warthin-Starry silver (B. henselae), and methenamine silver stains. Cultures for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi should be performed. 1:320 1:160 1:80 1:40

Figure 99-1 The development of antibodies to vari-1:20 ous Epstein-Barr virus antigens in patients with infectious mononucleosis. The titers are geometric mean values expressed as reciprocals of the serum dilution. The IgM 1:10 response to viral capsid antigen (VCA) is divided because of the significant differences noted according to the age of the patient. (From Jenson HB, Ench Y: Epstein-Barr virus. In Rose NR, Hamilton RG, Detrick B: Manual of Clinical Laboratory Immunology, ed 7, Washington DC, 2006, American Society for Microbiology Press, p 640.)
Moreover, diagnostic testing should generally be limited to those conditions that are reasonably likely and treatable, important in terms of public health considerations, and/ or capable of providing a definitive diagnosis that will consequently limit other testing. White Blood Cell (WBC) Count Elevations in the WBC count are often associated with infection, though many viral infections are associated with leukopenia. It is important to assess the WBC differential, given that different classes of microbes are associated with various leukocyte types. For example, bacteria are associated with an increase in polymorphonuclear neutrophils, often with elevated levels of earlier developmental forms such as bands; viruses are associated with an increase in lymphocytes; and certain parasites are associated with an increase in eosinophils. Table 144-2 lists the major infectious causes of eosinophilia. Inflammatory Markers The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level are indirect and direct measures of the acute-phase response, respectively, that can be used to assess a patient’s general level of inflammation. Moreover, these markers can be followed serially over time to monitor disease progress/resolution. It is noteworthy that the ESR changes relatively slowly, and its measurement more often than weekly usually is not useful; in contrast, CRP concentrations change rapidly, and daily measurements can be useful in the appropriate context. Although these markers are sensitive indicators of inflammation, neither is very specific. An extremely elevated ESR (>100 mm/h) has a 90% predictive value for a serious underlying disease (Table 144-3). Work is ongoing to identify other potentially useful inflammatory markers (e.g., procalcitonin, serum amyloid A protein); however, their clinical utility requires further validation. Analysis of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Assessment of CSF is critical for patients with suspected meningitis or encephalitis. An opening pressure should always be recorded, and fluid should routinely be sent for cell counts, Gram’s stain and culture, and determination of glucose and protein levels. A CSF Gram’s stain typically requires >105 bacteria/mL for reliable positivity; its specificity approaches 100%. Table 144-4 lists the typical CSF profiles for various infections.
Stool culture should be obtained in those with diarrhea marked by blood or mucous. Ill-appearing children should be admitted to the hospital and treated with empirical antibiotics. Approximately 0.2% of well-appearing febrile children 3 to 36 months of age vaccinated against S. pneumoniae and

H. influenzae and without localizing signs have occult bacteremia. Risk factors for occult bacteremia include temperature of 102.2° F (39° C) or greater, WBC count of 15,000/mm3 or more, and elevated absolute neutrophil count, band count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein. No combination of demographic factors (socioeconomic status, race, gender, and age), clinical parameters, or laboratory tests in these children reliably predicts occult bacteremia. Occult bacteremia in otherwise healthy children is usually transient and self-limited but may progress to serious localizing infections. Well-appearing children usually are followed as

Assess H and P for “low risk” status Age? <1 mo >1 mo Low risk Not low risk

CBC with differential, blood culture, urine culture

All parameters normal? No Yes

All parameters normal? NoYes outpatients without empirical antibiotic treatment or, alternatively, treated with intramuscular ceftriaxone. Regardless of antibiotic treatment, close follow-up for at least 72 hours, including re-evaluation in 24 hours or immediately with any clinical change, is essential. Children with a positive blood culture require immediate re-evaluation, repeat blood culture, consideration for lumbar puncture, and empirical antibiotic treatment. Children with sickle cell disease have impaired splenic function and properdin-dependent opsonization that places them at increased risk for bacteremia, especially during the first 5 years of life. Children with sickle cell disease and fever who appear seriously ill, have a temperature of 104° F (40° C) or greater, or WBC count less than 5000/mm3 or greater than 30,000/mm3 should be hospitalized and treated empirically with antibiotics. Other children with sickle cell disease and fever should have blood culture, empirical treatment with ceftriaxone, and close outpatient follow-up.
The white blood cell (WBC) count with viral pneumonias is often normal or mildly elevated, with a predominance of lymphocytes, whereas with bacterial pneumonias the WBC count is elevated (>20,000/mm3) with a predominance of neutrophils. Mild eosinophilia is characteristic of infant C. trachomatis pneumonia. Blood cultures should be performed on hospitalized children to attempt to diagnose a bacterial cause of pneumonia. Blood cultures are positive in 10% to 20% of bacterial pneumonia and are considered to be confirmatory of the cause of pneumonia if positive for a recognized respiratory pathogen. Urinary antigen tests are especially useful for L. pneumophila (legionnaires’ disease). Viral respiratory pathogens can be diagnosed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or rapid viral antigen detection, but neither rules out concomitant bacterial pneumonia. M. pneumoniae should be suspected if cold agglutinins are present in peripheral blood samples and can be confirmed by Mycoplasma PCR. CMV and enterovirus can be cultured from the nasopharynx, urine, or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The diagnosis of M. tuberculosis is established by tuberculin skin test, serum interferon-gamma release assay, or analysis of sputum or gastric aspirates by culture, antigen detection, or PCR. The need to establish an etiologic diagnosis of pneumonia is greater for patients who are ill enough to require hospitalization, immunocompromised patients, patients with recurrent pneumonia, or patients with pneumonia unresponsive to empirical therapy. For these patients, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage and brush mucosal biopsy, needle aspiration of the lung, and open lung biopsy are methods of obtaining material for microbiologic diagnosis. When there is a pleural effusion or empyema, a thoracentesis to obtain pleural fluid can be diagnostic and therapeutic. Evaluation differentiates between empyema and a sterile parapneumonic effusion caused by irritation of the pleura contiguous with the pneumonia. Gram stain, culture, or broad-range bacterial PCR may lead to microbiologic diagnosis. The pleural fluid should be cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses.
Regional lymphadenopathy is also characteristic. The lesion evolves into a black eschar within 7–10 days. Inhalational: Presents with fever, dyspnea, hypoxia, hypotension, or symptoms of pneumonia (1–3 days after exposure), classically due to hemorrhagic mediastinitis. GI: Occurs after the ingestion of poorly cooked, contaminated meat; can present with dysphagia, nausea/vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and abdominal pain. CXR is the most sensitive test for inhalational disease (widened mediastinum, pleural effusions, infltrates). Aerobic culture and Gram stain of ulcer exudate show nonmotile short chains of bacilli. Antibody tests are also useful in confrming the diagnosis. ■ Ciprof oxacin or doxycycline plus one or two additional antibiotics for at least 14 days are frst-line therapy for inhalational disease or cutaneous disease of the face, head, or neck. Many strains express β-lactamases that confer resistance to penicillin; therefore, penicillin and amoxicillin are no longer recommended as single agents for inhalational disease. ■For cutaneous disease, treat for 7–10 days. Postexposure prophylaxis (ciprof oxacin) to prevent inhalation anthrax should be continued for 60 days. Bone or bone marrow infection 2° to direct spread from a soft tissue infection (80% of cases) is most common in adults, whereas infection due to hematogenous seeding (20% of cases) is more common in children (metaphyses of the long bones) and IV drug users (vertebral bodies). Common pathogens are outlined in Table 2.8-12. Presents with localized bone pain and tenderness along with warmth, swelling, erythema, and limited motion of the adjacent joint. Systemic symptoms (fevers, chills) and purulent drainage may be present.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options? This patient developed hyponatremia in the context of a central lung mass and postobstructive pneumonia. He was clinically euvolemic, with a generous urine Na+ concentration and low plasma uric acid concentration. He was euthyroid, with no evidence of pituitary dysfunction or secondary adrenal insufficiency. The clinical presentation is consistent with the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD). Although pneumonia was a potential contributor to the SIAD, it was notable that the plasma Na+ concentration decreased despite a clinical response to antibiotics. It was suspected that this patient had SIAD due to small-cell lung cancer, with a central lung mass on chest CT and a significant smoking history. There was a history of laryngeal cancer and renal cancer but with no evidence of recurrent disease; these malignancies were not considered contributory to his SIAD. Biopsy of the lung mass ultimately confirmed the diagnosis of small-cell lung cancer, which is responsible for ~75% of malignancy-associated SIAD; ~10% of patients with this neuroendocrine tumor will have a plasma Na+ concentration of <130 meq/L at presentation. The patient had no other “nonosmotic” stimuli for an increase in AVP, with no medications associated with SIAD and minimal pain or nausea. The patient had no symptoms attributable to hyponatremia but was judged at risk for worsening hyponatremia from severe SIAD. Persistent, chronic hyponatremia (duration >48 h) results in an efflux of organic osmolytes (creatine, betaine, glutamate, myoinositol, and taurine) from brain cells; this response reduces intracellular osmolality and the osmotic gradient favoring water entry. This cellular response does not fully protect patients from symptoms, which can include vomiting, nausea, confusion, and seizures, usually at plasma Na+ concentration <125 meq/L. Even patients who are judged “asymptomatic” can manifest subtle gait and cognitive defects that reverse with correction of hyponatremia.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
Candidal thrush. Workup should include an HIV test. Treat with nystatin oral suspension. ≤ 200 for P. jiroveci (with TMP-SMX); ≤ 50–100 for MAI (with clarithromycin/azithromycin). Pregnancy, vesicoureteral reﬂux, anatomic anomalies, indwelling catheters, kidney stones. 7–10 days. Lesion of 1° Lyme disease. Fever, heart murmur, Osler’s nodes, splinter hemorrhages, Janeway lesions, Roth’s spots. Parvovirus B19. Taenia solium (cysticercosis). Name the organism:

Pregnant women with pets

Alcoholic with pneumonia

A 55-year-old man who is a smoker and a heavy drinker presents with a new cough and ﬂulike symptoms. Gram stain shows no organisms; silver stain of sputum shows gram-negative rods. What is the diagnosis? A middle-aged man presents with acute-onset monoarticular joint pain and bilateral Bell’s palsy. What is the likely diagnosis, and how did he get it?
The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap. 24). Petechial rashes are typically seen with meningococcemia or Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF; see Fig. 25e-16); erythroderma is associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS) and drug fever. The soft tissue and muscle examination is critical. Areas of erythema or duskiness, edema, and tenderness may indicate underlying necrotizing fasciitis, myositis, or myonecrosis. The neurologic examination must include a careful assessment of mental status for signs of early encephalopathy. Evidence of nuchal rigidity or focal neurologic findings should be sought. DIAGNOSTIC WORKUP After a quick clinical assessment, diagnostic material should be obtained rapidly and antibiotic and supportive treatment begun. Blood (for cultures; baseline complete blood count with differential; measurement of serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and serum glucose; and liver function tests) can be obtained at the time an IV line is placed and before antibiotics are administered. The blood lactate concentration also should be measured. Three sets of blood cultures should be performed for patients with possible acute endocarditis. Asplenic patients should have a buffy coat examined for bacteria; these patients can have >106 organisms per milliliter of blood (compared with 104/mL in patients with an intact spleen). Blood smears from patients at risk for severe parasitic disease, such as malaria or babesiosis (Chap.
In women, pain may also arise from the ovary, fallopian tube, and uterus. In a young patient, diseases of these organs are rare. Infection and pelvic inflammatory disease may occur in the younger patient and need to be considered. The patient gave no history of these disorders. Upon further questioning, however, the patient revealed that her last menstrual period was 6 weeks before this examination. The senior physician realized that a potential cause of the abdominal pain was a pregnancy outside the uterus (ectopic pregnancy). The patient was rushed for an abdominal ultrasound, which revealed no fetus or sac in the uterus. She was also noted to have a positive pregnancy test. The patient underwent surgery and was found to have a ruptured fallopian tube caused by an ectopic pregnancy. Whenever a patient has apparent pelvic pain, it is important to consider the gender-related anatomical differences. Ectopic pregnancy should always be considered in women of childbearing age. A 35-year-old woman visited her family practitioner because she had a “bloating” feeling and an increase in abdominal girth. The family practitioner examined the lower abdomen, which revealed a mass that extended from the superior pubic rami to the level of the umbilicus. The superior margin of the mass was easily palpated, but the inferior margin appeared to be less well defined. This patient has a pelvic mass.
A developmental arrest or complication may prevent the kidney from obtaining its usual position. Fortunately, it is unusual for patients to have any symptoms relating to a pelvic kidney. This patient had no symptoms attributable to the pelvic kidney and she was discharged. A 19-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 36-hour history of lower abdominal pain that was sharp and initially intermittent, later becoming constant and severe. The patient also reported feeling nauseated and vomited once in the ER. She did not have diarrhea and had opened her bowels normally 8 hours before admission. She had no symptoms of dysuria. She was afebrile, slightly tachycardic at 95/min, and had a normal blood pressure. Blood results showed mild leukocytosis of 11.6 x 109/L and normal renal and liver function tests. She reported being sexually active with a long-term partner. She was never pregnant, and the urine pregnancy test on admission was negative. On physical examination there was tenderness in the right iliac fossa with guarding. On vaginal examination a tender mass in the right adnexal region was felt. The patient subsequently underwent a transvaginal ultrasound examination for evaluation of adnexal pathology. The scan showed a markedly enlarged right ovary measuring up to 8 cm in long axis with echogenic stroma and peripherally distributed follicles.
Nausea and vomiting accompany normal pregnancy, but also, as the uterus enlarges, the appendix commonly moves upward and outward from the right lower quadrant (Baer, 1932; Erkek, 2015; Pates, 2009). Another often-stated reason for late diagnosis is that some degree of leukocytosis accompanies normal pregnancy. For these and other reasons, pregnant womenespecially those late in gestation-frequently do not have clinical findings "typical" for appendicitis. Thus, it commonly is confused with cholecystitis, labor, pyelonephritis, renal colic, placental abruption, or uterine leiomyoma degeneration. Most reports indicate increasing morbidity and mortality rates with advancing gestational age. nd as the appendix is progressively delected upward by the growing uterus, omental containment of infection becomes increasingly unlikely. It is indisputable that appendiceal perforation is more common during later pregnancy (Abbasi, 2014). In the studies by Andersson (2001) and Ueberrueck (2004), the incidence of perforation was approximately 8, 12, and 20 percent in successive trimesters. Persistent abdominal pain and tenderness are the most reproducible findings. Right-lower quadrant pain is the most frequent, although pain migrates upward with appendiceal displacement CMourad, 2000). For initial evaluation, sonographic abdominal imaging is reasonable in suspected appendicitis, even if to exclude an obstetrical cause of pain (Butala, 2010). hat said, graded compression sonography is diicult because of cecal displacement and uterine imposition (Pedrosa, 2009). Appendiceal computed tomography is more sensitive and accurate than

FIGURE 54-4 Anterior-posterior magnetic resonance image of a periappendiceal abscess in a midtrimester pregnancy. The abscess is approximately 5 x 6 cm, and the appendiceal lumen (arow) is visible within the right-lower quadrant mass. The gravid uterus is seen to the right of this mass.
Eur ] Clin Invest 7:47, 1977

Lindheimer MD, Davison ]M, Katz AI: he kidney and hypertension in pregnancy: twenty exciting years. Semin NephroI21:173, 2001

Lindheimer MD, Griinfeld ]P, Davison ]M: Renal disorders. In Barran WM, Lindheimer MD (eds): Medical Disorders During Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000, p 39

Lindheimer MD, Kanter D: Interpreting abnormal proteinuria in pregnancy: the need for a more pathophysiological approach. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):365,r2010

Lindheimer MD, Richardson DA, Ehrlich EN, et al: Potassium homeostasis in pregnancy.r] Reprod Med 32:517,r1987

Lippi G, Albiero A, Montagnana M, et al: Lipid and lipoprotein profile in physiological pregnancy. Clin Lab 53: 173, 2007

Liur], Sun B, Yin H, et al: Hepcidin: a promising therapeutic target for iron disorders: a systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) 95:e3150, 2016

Liu X, Arany Z: Maternal cardiac metabolism in pregnancy. Cardiovasc Res 101:545,r2014 Lowe L, Karbanr]: Genetics, genomics and metabolomics: new insights into maternal metabolism during pregnancy. Diabet Med 31 :254, 2014

Lumbers ER, Pringle KG: Roles of the circulating renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in human pregnancy. Am] Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 306:R91,r2014

Lynn N, Steinkeler ]A, Wilkins-Haug LE, et al: Hyperreactio luteinalis (enlarged ovaries) during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy: common clinical associations.r] Ultrasound Med 32:1285,r2013

Macedo M, Kim B, Khoury R, et al: A rare case of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Am] Emerg Med 35(4):668.e1, 2017

Macfie AG, Magides D, Richmond MN, et al: Gastric emptying in pregnancy. Br] Anaesth 67:54, 1991

Mahendru A, Everett TR, Wilkinson IB, et al: Maternal cardiovascular changes from pre-pregnancy to very early pregnancy. ] Hypertens 30(11):2168,r2012

Majed BH, Khalil A: Molecular mechanisms regulating the vascular prostacyclin pathways and their adaptation during pregnancy and in the newborn. Pharmacol Rev 64(3):540, 2012

Malinowski AK, Senr], Sermer M: Hyperreactio luteinalis: maternal and fetal efects.r] Obstet Gynaecol Can 37:715, 2015

Mandala M, 0501 G: Physiological remodeling of the maternal uterine circulation during pregnancy. Basic Clin Pharmacol ToxicolrllO:12, 2012 Mardones-Santander F, Salazar G, Rosso P, et al: Maternal body composition near term and birth weight.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
In the vast majority of cases, threatened abortion does not result in a pregnancy loss, but may be associated with poor outcomes later in pregnancy. In a study of 347 patients with a first-trimester pregnancy documented by ultrasonography, the overall rate of pregnancy loss was 6.1% to 4.2% in patients without bleeding and 12.4% in patients with bleeding (4). In a review of over 800 women presenting with first trimester vaginal bleeding or abdominal pain, nearly 14% with bleeding had spontaneous abortion compared with 2.5% in patients without bleeding (5). There is no effective therapy for a threatened intrauterine pregnancy. Bed rest and progesterone treatment, although often advocated, are not effective (16–18). Women with first trimester vaginal bleeding who do go on to have continuing pregnancies have nearly three times the risk of preterm birth between 28 and 31 weeks as women without bleeding, and a 50% higher likelihood of preterm birth between 32 to 36 weeks (19). First trimester bleeding may predict higher risk for intrauterine growth restriction, preterm premature rupture of membranes, and placental abruption (20). Bacterial vaginosis, if present, should be treated, as this is associated with increased risk for spontaneous abortion (21). Inevitable Abortion With an inevitable abortion, the volume of bleeding is often greater than with other types of abortion, and the cervical os is open and effaced, but no tissue has passed. Most patients have crampy lower abdominal pain, and some have cervical motion or adnexal tenderness. When it is certain that the pregnancy is not viable because the cervical os is dilated or excessive bleeding is present, the patient should be offered medical or surgical management. Blood type and Rh determination and a complete blood count should be obtained if there is any concern about the amount of bleeding. Rh0(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) should be given if the patient’s blood is Rh negative (22). It is acceptable to give a dose of 50 μg until 12 completed weeks; if this dose is not available, the standard 300 μg dose may be given. Incomplete Abortion An incomplete abortion is a partial expulsion of the pregnancy tissue.
Obstet Gynecol 2006;107:399–413.) With pelvic ultrasound, spontaneous abortion can be differentiated into various categories, based on examination findings and ultrasound findings. Missed abortion is defined as a nonviable intrauterine pregnancy in the presence of a closed cervix and little or no abdominal cramping or vaginal bleeding and can be subdivided into anembryonic gestation and embryonic demise. Anembryonic gestation is a pregnancy where the embryo failed to develop and is confirmed

Table 20.1 Potential Causes of Spontaneous Pregnancy Loss

Maternal systemic disease (diabetes mellitus, infection, thrombophilia, etc.) Maternal alcohol consumption (moderate to high)

Extremes of maternal weight when the mean gestational sac diameter measured by transvaginal ultrasound is greater than 20 mm and no embryonic pole is present. When an embryo is present with crown-rump length greater than 5 mm and no cardiac activity, this is classified as embryonic demise, and the pregnancy is nonviable (14). Threatened Abortion Threatened abortion is defined as vaginal bleeding before 20 weeks of gestation. It occurs in at least 20% of all pregnancies (15). The distinction from missed or inevitable abortion requires ultrasound documentation of an intrauterine embryo or fetus with cardiac activity. The bleeding is usually light and may be associated with mild lower abdominal or cramping pain. The differential diagnosis in these patients includes consideration of possible cervical polyps, vaginitis, cervical carcinoma, gestational trophoblastic disease, ectopic pregnancy, trauma, and foreign body. On physical examination, the abdomen usually is not tender, and the cervix is closed. Bleeding can be seen coming from the os, and usually there is no cervical motion or adnexal tenderness. In the vast majority of cases, threatened abortion does not result in a pregnancy loss, but may be associated with poor outcomes later in pregnancy. In a study of 347 patients with a first-trimester pregnancy documented by ultrasonography, the overall rate of pregnancy loss was 6.1% to 4.2% in patients without bleeding and 12.4% in patients with bleeding (4).
Many forms of pre-or postconceptional tests have been proposed to help predict pregnancy outcome (201,219,327,462,463); none have been fully substantiated in large, prospective trials. The documentation of fetal cardiac activity on ultrasound may offer prognostic value; however, it appears that its predictions may be greatly affected by any underlying diagnosis. In one study, the live birth rate following documentation of fetal cardiac activity between 5 to 6 weeks from the last menstrual period was approximately 77% in women with two or more unexplained spontaneous abortions (464). It may be important to note that the majority of the patients in this study had evidence of inappropriate antitrophoblast cellular immunity. Others have shown that 86% of patients with antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss had fetal cardiac activity detected prior to subsequent demise (465). A prospective, longitudinal, observational study of 325 patients with unexplained recurrent pregnancy losses demonstrated that only 3% of 55 miscarriages occurred following the detection of fetal cardiac activity using transvaginal ultrasonography (466). Table 33.4 Prognosis for a Viable Birth

Following: 1. Edmonds DK, Lindsay KS, Miller JF, et al. Early embryonic mortality in women. Fertil Steril 1982;38:447–453. 2. Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, O’Connor JF, et al. Incidence of early loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1988;319:189–194. 3.
Fetal distress. Painless, bright red bleeding that often ceases in 1–2 hours with or without uterine contractions. Usually no fetal distress. Diagnosis Primarily clinical. Transabdominal/transvaginal ultrasound sensitivity is only 50%; look for retroplacental clot; most useful for ruling out previa. Transabdominal/transvaginal ultrasound sensitivity is > 95%; look for an abnormally positioned placenta. Pathophysiology Incidence

Stabilize patients with mild abruption and a premature fetus; manage expectantly (hospitalize; start IV and fetal monitoring; type and cross blood; bed rest). Moderate to severe abruption: Immediate delivery (vaginal delivery with amniotomy if mother and fetus are stable and delivery is expected soon; C-section for maternal or fetal distress). No vaginal exam! Stabilize patients with a premature fetus; manage expectantly. Give tocolytics. Serial ultrasound to assess fetal growth; resolution of partial previa. Give betamethasone to help with fetal lung maturity. Deliver by C-section. Indications for delivery include labor, life-threatening bleeding, fetal distress, documented fetal lung maturity, and 36 weeks’ GA.

Hemorrhagic shock.
Assessment of the fetal heart rate is the most valuable information regarding fetal viability. Fetal monitoring should initially be assessed with bedside FAST ultrasound to document the heart rate of the fetus; subsequent monitoring should be per-formed with a cardiotocographic device that measures both con-tractions and fetal heart tones (FHTs). Because change in heart rate is the primary response of the fetus to hypoxia or hypo-tension, anything above an FHT of 160 is a concern, whereas bradycardia (FHT of <120) is considered fetal distress. Indica-tions for emergent cesarean section include: (a) severe mater-nal shock or impending death (if the fetus is delivered within 5 minutes, survival is estimated at 70%), (b) uterine injury or significant fetal distress (anticipated survival rates of >70% if FHTs are present and fetal gestational age is >28 weeks).149If possible, a member of the obstetrics team should be present during initial evaluation. Vaginal bleeding can signal early cervical dilation and labor, abruptio placentae, or placenta previa. Amniotic sac rupture can result in prolapse of the umbil-ical cord with fetal compromise. Strong contractions are associ-ated with true labor and should prompt consideration of delivery and resuscitation of the neonate. Focused prenatal history-taking should elicit a history of pregnancy-induced hypertension, ges-tational diabetes, congenital heart disease, preterm labor, or placental abnormalities. Asking the patient when the baby first moved and if she is currently experiencing movement of the fetus is important. Determining fetal age is key for consider-ations of viability. Gestational age may be estimated by noting fundal height, with the fundus approximating the umbilicus at 20 weeks and the costal margin at 40 weeks. Discrepancy in dates and size may be due to uterine rupture or hemorrhage.Initial evaluation for abdominopelvic trauma in pregnant patients should proceed in the standard manner. Ultrasound (FAST) of the abdomen should evaluate the four windows (pericardial, right and left upper quadrant, and bladder) and additionally assess FHTs, fetal movement, and sufficiency of amniotic fluid. DPL can be performed in pregnant women via a supraumbilical, open technique. Trauma radiography of pregnant patients presents a conundrum.
If lifestyle modification alone is successful, close monitoring is necessary at 3-to 6-month intervals. When lifestyle modification is unsuccessful, a blood pressure medication should be started to decrease target organ disease. When beginning therapy, concurrent medical conditions treatable with a common agent should be sought. Gender is not an important consideration in choosing an antihypertensive agent. Concurrent diseases and race are important for patients who:

Have migraine headaches, for which beta-blockers or calcium channel agonists may be the best choice

Are African American and are likely to respond better to a combination of diuretics and calcium channel blockers

Have diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and heart failure, for which ACE inhibitors should be used

Have had myocardial infarctions and should receive beta-blockers because they reduce the risk for sudden death and recurrent myocardial infarctions. A summary of the compelling indications for individual drug classes is listed in Table 9.7. Once antihypertensive medications are initiated, monitoring should be instituted at approximately monthly intervals to determine blood pressures and to assess side effects. Patients with stage II hypertension or with complicated comorbid illnesses may need more frequent monitoring. The serum creatinine and potassium levels should be monitored 1 to 2 times per year. When blood pressure goals are reached, patients may be seen in the office at 3-to 6-month intervals. Patients capable of home blood pressure monitoring should be encouraged to measure blood pressure at the same time twice weekly (20). If intolerable side effects develop, a different class of medications should be used and the patient’s progress monitored. Patients whose blood pressure is difficult to control with two agents should be considered for referral. Causes of resistance to therapy include diseases missed during the initial evaluation, unrecognized early end-stage disease, and poor compliance. Patients with evidence of target organ disease should be considered for referral to the appropriate specialist for more intensive diagnostic workup and therapy.
She developed muscle symptoms with each of 3 statins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, and simvastatin) so they were discontinued although she did not develop elevated levels of creatine kinase. Her untreated LDL-C is 235 mg/dL and triglycerides 125 mg/dL. Her LDL-C goal for primary prevention of arteriosclerotic vascular disease is in the 70-mg/dL range because of her multiple lipopro-tein risk factors and her mother’s history of premature coronary artery disease. She has no other risk factors and her diet and exercise habits are excellent. How would you manage this patient? Plasma lipids are transported in complexes called lipoproteins. Metabolic disorders that involve elevations in any lipoprotein species are termed hyperlipoproteinemias or hyperlipidemias. Hyperlipemia denotes increased levels of triglycerides. The major clinical sequelae of hyperlipidemias are acute pancreatitis and atherosclerosis. The former occurs in patients with marked hyperlipemia. Control of triglycerides can prevent recurrent attacks of this life-threatening disease. Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death for both genders in the USA and other Western countries. Lipoproteins that contain apolipoprotein (apo) B-100 convey lipids into the artery wall. These are low-density (LDL), intermediate-density (IDL), very-low-density (VLDL), and lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]). Remnant lipoproteins formed during the catabolism of chylomicrons that contain the B-48 protein (apo B-48) can also enter the artery wall, contributing to atherosclerosis.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
His profuse sweating was typical and partly due to α1 receptors, although the large magnitude of drenching sweats in pheochromocytoma has never been fully explained. Treatment would consist of preoperative pharma-cologic control of blood pressure and normalization of blood volume if reduced, followed by surgical resection of the tumor. Control of blood pressure extremes might be necessary during surgery, probably with nitroprusside. Neal L. Benowitz, MD

A 35-year-old man presents with a blood pressure of 150/95 mm Hg. He has been generally healthy, is sedentary, drinks several cocktails per day, and does not smoke cigarettes. He has a family history of hypertension, and his father died of a myocardial infarction at age 55. Physical examination is remarkable only for moderate obesity. Total cholesterol is 220, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level is 40 mg/dL. Fasting glucose is 105 mg/dL. Chest X-ray is normal. Electrocardiogram shows left ven-tricular enlargement. How would you treat this patient? Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular disease. In a National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) carried out in 2011 to 2012, hypertension was found in 29% of American adults and 65% of adults age 65 years or older. The prevalence varies with age, race, education, and many other variables.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
Arch Neurol 39:192, 1982. Critchley M: Periodic hypersomnia and megaphagia in adolescent males. Brain 85:627, 1962. Culebras A, Moore JT: Magnetic resonance findings in REM sleep behavior disorder. Neurology 39:1519, 1989. Daly D, Yoss R: Narcolepsy. In: Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW (eds): Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol 15: The Epilepsies. Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1974, pp 836–852. Dauvillers Y, Carlander B, Rivier F, et al: Successful management of cataplexy with intravenous immunoglobulins shortly after narcolepsy onset. Ann Neurol 56:905, 2004. Dauvillers Y, Montplaisir J, Cochen V, et al: Post-H1N1 narcolepsy-cataplexy. Sleep 33:1428, 2010. Dement WC, Carskadon MA, Ley R: The prevalence of narcolepsy. Sleep Res 2:147, 1973.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
An aura is experienced by 50–60% of patients with epilepsy. See Table 2.10-8 for common etiologies by age. To further narrow down the etiology of a seizure, assess the following:

Determine whether the patient has a history of epilepsy (i.e., a history of unprovoked and recurrent seizures). Other seizures may be self-limited and may resolve once an underlying medical condition has been treated. Elevated serum prolactin levels are consistent with an epileptic seizure in the immediate postictal period. TABLE 2.10-8. Causes of Seizure by Age Group

Non-neurologic etiologies include hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, hyperosmolar states, hepatic encephalopathy, uremia, porphyria, drug overdose (cocaine, antidepressants, neuroleptics, methylxanthines, lidocaine), drug withdrawal (alcohol and other sedatives), eclampsia, hyperthermia, hypertensive encephalopathy, head trauma, and cerebral hypoperfusion. Seizures with a focal onset (or focal postictal deficit) suggest focal CNS pathology. They may be the presenting sign of a tumor, stroke, AVM, infection, hemorrhage, or developmental abnormality. First seizures that resolve after a single episode are frequently left untreated when the underlying cause is unknown. Arise from a discrete region, or an “epileptogenic focus,” in one cerebral hemisphere and do not lead to loss of consciousness unless they secondarily generalize. Simple partial seizures: May include motor features (e.g., jacksonian march, or the progressive jerking of successive body regions) as well as sensory, autonomic, or psychic features (e.g., fear, déjà vu, hallucinations) without alteration of consciousness. A postictal focal neurologic deficit (e.g., hemiplegia/hemiparesis, or Todd’s paralysis) is possible and usually resolves within 24 hours. Often confused with acute stroke (ruled out by MRI). Complex partial seizures: Typically involve the temporal lobe (70–80%) with bilateral spread of the aberrant electrical discharge.
Mesulam MM: Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia. Ann Neurol 11:592, 1982. Miller RG, Jackson CE, Kasarskis EJ, et al: Practice parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Multidisciplinary care, symptom management, and cognitive/behavioral impairment (an evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the

American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 73:1227, 2009a. Miller RG, Jackson CE, Kasarskis EJ, et al: Practice parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Drug, nutritional, and respiratory therapies (an evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 73:1218, 2009b. Mollaret P: La Maladie de Friedreich. Paris, Legrand, 1929. Moreno Martinez JM, Garcia de la Rocha ML, Martin Araquez A: Monomelic segmental amyotrophy: A Spanish case involving the leg. Rev Neurol (Paris) 146:443, 1990. Mulder DW, Kurland LT, Offord KP, Beard CM: Familial adult motor neuron disease: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 36:511, 1986. Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration: Mutations in COQ2 in familial and sporadic multiple-system atrophy. N Engl J Med 369:233, 2013. Murata Y, Yamaguchi S, Kawakami H: Characteristic magnetic resonance imaging findings in Machado-Joseph disease.
Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy suggest an underlying lymphoproliferative disease, whereas petechiae suggest platelet dysfunction. Past laboratory measurements are helpful to determine a time of onset. In the anemic patient, physical examination may demonstrate a forceful heartbeat, strong peripheral pulses, and a systolic “flow” murmur. The skin and mucous membranes may be pale if the hemoglobin is <80–100 g/L (8–10 g/dL). This part of the physical examination should focus on areas where vessels are close to the surface such as the mucous membranes, nail beds, and palmar creases. If the palmar creases are lighter in color than the surrounding skin when the hand is hyperextended, the hemoglobin level is usually <80 g/L (8 g/dL). Table 77-1 lists the tests used in the initial workup of anemia. A routine complete blood count (CBC) is required as part of the evaluation and includes the hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell indices: the mean cell volume (MCV) in femtoliters, mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) in picograms per cell, and mean concentration of hemoglobin per volume of red cells (MCHC) in grams per liter (non-SI: grams per deciliter). The red cell indices are calculated as shown in Table 77-2, and the normal variations in the hemoglobin and hematocrit with age are shown in Table 77-3. A number of physiologic factors affect the CBC, including age, sex, pregnancy, smoking, and altitude. High-normal hemoglobin values may be seen in men and women who live at altitude or smoke heavily. Hemoglobin elevations due to smoking reflect normal compensation due to the displacement of O2 by CO in hemoglobin binding. Other important information is provided by the reticulocyte count and measurements of iron supply including serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC; an indirect measure of serum transferrin), and serum ferritin. Marked alterations in the red cell indices usually reflect disorders of maturation or iron deficiency. A careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear is important, and clinical laboratories often provide a description of both the red and white cells, a white cell differential count, and the platelet count.
Immunohemolytic anemia is caused by antibodies that bind to determinants on red cell membranes. These antibodies may arise spontaneously or be induced by exogenous agents such as drugs or chemicals. Immunohemolytic anemia is uncommon and is classified based on (1) the nature of the antibody and (2) the presence of predisposing conditions (summarized in

Table 12.4

The diagnosis depends on the detection of antibodies and/or complement on red cells. This is done with the direct Coombs test, in which the patient’s red cells are incubated with antibodies against human immunoglobulin or complement. In a positive test result, these antibodies cause the patient’s red cells to clump (agglutinate). The indirect Coombs test, which assesses the ability of the patient’s serum to agglutinate test red cells bearing defined surface determinants, can then be used to characterize the target of the antibody. In this entity, hemolysis results from the binding of high-affinity autoantibodies to red cells, which are then removed from the circulation by phagocytes in the

Table 12.4 Classification of Immunohemolytic Anemias

Secondary:Bcellneoplasms(e.g.,chroniclymphocyticleukemia),autoimmunedisorders(e.g.,systemiclupuserythematosus),drugs(e.g.,α-methyldopa,penicillin,quinidine)

Acute: Mycoplasma infection,infectiousmononucleosis

Chronic:idiopathic,Bcelllymphoidneoplasms(e.g.,lymphoplasmacyticlymphoma) spleen and elsewhere. In addition to frank erythrophagocytosis, incomplete consumption (“nibbling”) of antibody-coated red cells by macrophages removes membrane and transforms red cells into spherocytes, which are rapidly destroyed in the spleen, just as in hereditary spherocytosis (described earlier). Warm antibody immunohemolytic anemia is caused by immunoglobulin G (IgG) or (rarely) IgA antibodies that are active at 37°C. More than 60% of cases are idiopathic (primary), whereas another 25% are secondary to an underlying immunologic disorder (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus) or are induced by drugs. The clinical severity is variable, but most patients have chronic mild anemia and moderate splenomegaly and require no treatment. The mechanisms of hemolysis induced by drugs are varied and in some instances poorly understood. Drugs such as α-methyldopa induce autoantibodies against intrinsic red cell constituents, in particular Rh blood group antigens. Presumably, the drug somehow alters the immunogenicity of native epitopes and thereby circumvents T cell tolerance (Chapter 5). Other drugs such as penicillin act as haptens, which induce an antibody response by binding covalently to red cell membrane proteins.
High LDH, elevated indirect bilirubin, and ↓ haptoglobin levels are consistent with a diagnosis of hemolytic anemia. Also obtain a reticulocyte count. A Coombs’ test is used to detect autoimmune hemolysis. Treatment varies with the cause of hemolysis but typically includes corticosteroids to address immunologic causes and iron supplementation to replace urinary losses. Splenectomy may be helpful, and transfusion may be necessary to treat severe anemia. A rare condition caused by failure of blood cell production due to destruction of bone marrow cells. It may be hereditary, as in Fanconi’s anemia; may have an autoimmune or a viral etiology (e.g., HIV, parvovirus B19); or may result from exposure to toxins (e.g., drugs, cleaning solvents) or radiation. Patients are typically pancytopenic, with symptoms resulting from a lack of RBCs, WBCs, and platelets—e.g., pallor, weakness, a tendency to infection, petechiae, bruising, and bleeding. The disease may be of sudden or sustained onset and may be of variable severity, depending on the patient’s blood counts. Diagnosed by clinical presentation and CBC; verifed by a bone marrow biopsy revealing hypocellularity and space occupied by fat. The differential includes megaloblastic anemia, as both diseases feature an elevated MCV. The classic case of G6PD deficiency is an African-American male soldier in Vietnam who took quinine. Indirect Coombs’ tests detect antibodies to RBCs in the patient’s serum. Direct Coombs’ tests detect sensitized erythrocytes. Patients with Fanconi’s anemia may be identified on physical exam by café au lait spots, short stature, and radial/thumb hypoplasia/ aplasia.
The diagnosis of fetal-maternal hemorrhage is confirmed by the Kleihauer-Betke acid elution test. Pink fetal RBCs are observed and counted in the mother’s peripheral blood smear because fetal hemoglobin is resistant to acid elution; adult hemoglobin is eluted, leaving discolored maternal cells (patients with sickle cell anemia or hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin may have a false-positive result, and ABO incompatibility may produce a false-negative result). Hemolysis in utero resulting from any cause may produce a spectrum of clinical manifestations at birth. Severe hydropswith anasarca, heart failure, and pulmonary edema may prevent adequate ventilation at birth, resulting in asphyxia. Infantsaffected with hemolysis in utero have hepatosplenomegaly andpallor and become jaundiced within the first 24 hours afterbirth. Less severely affected infants manifest pallor and hepatosplenomegaly at birth and become jaundiced subsequently.Patients with ABO incompatibility often are asymptomaticand show no physical signs at birth; mild anemia with jaundicedevelops during the first 24 to 72 hours of life. Because hydrops, anemia, or jaundice are secondary to many diverse causes of hemolysis, a laboratory evaluation is needed in all patients with suspected hemolysis. A complete blood count, blood smear, reticulocyte count, blood type, and direct Coombs test (to determine the presence of antibody-coated RBCs) should be performed in the initial evaluation of all infants with hemolysis. Reduced hemoglobin levels, reticulocytosis, and a blood smear characterized by polychromasia and anisocytosis are expected with isoimmune hemolysis. Spherocytes commonly are observed in ABO incompatibility. The determination of the blood type and the Coombs test identify the responsible antigen and antibody in immunologically mediated hemolysis. In the absence of a positive Coombs test and blood group differences between the mother and fetus, other causes of non-immune hemolysis must be considered. RBC enzyme assays, hemoglobin electrophoresis, or RBC membrane tests (osmotic fragility, spectrin assay) should be performed. Internal hemorrhage also may be associated with anemia, reticulocytosis, and jaundice when the hemorrhage reabsorbs; ultrasound evaluation of the brain, liver, spleen, or adrenal gland may be indicated when nonimmune hemolysis is suspected. Shock is more typical in patients with internal hemorrhage, whereas in hemolytic diseases, heart failure may be seen with severe anemia.
The presence of jaundice suggests hemolysis. Petechiae and purpura indicate a coagulopathy. Hepatosplenomegaly and adenopathy suggest infiltrative disorders. Growth failure or poor weight gain suggests an anemia of chronic disease. An essential element of the physical examination is the investigation of the stool for the presence of occult blood. A hemoglobin or hematocrit test indicates the severity of the anemia. Once anemia has been substantiated, the workup should include a complete blood count with differential, platelet count, indices, and reticulocyte count. Examination of the peripheral blood smear assesses the morphology of RBCs (Fig. 150-2), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets. All cell lines should be scrutinized to determine whether anemia is the result of a process limited to the erythroid line or a process that affects other marrow elements. Using data obtained from the indices and reticulocyte count, the workup can be organized on the basis of whether RBC production is adequate or inadequate and whether the cells are microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic (see Fig. 150-1). An appropriate bone marrow response to anemia would be an elevated absolute reticulocyte number, suggestingincreased production and implying either hemolysis orblood loss. Anemia with a normal reticulocyte number suggests decreased or ineffective production for the degree ofanemia. Reticulocytopenia signifies an acute onset so thatthe marrow has not had adequate time to respond, thatreticulocytes are being destroyed in the marrow (antibodymediated), or that intrinsic bone marrow disease is present.The best indicators of the severity of hemolysis are the hemoglobin level and the elevation of the reticulocyte count.
MRSA infection of buttocks, vulva, and genital tract in women. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2009;11:465–470. 140. Brook I. Microbiology and management of polymicrobial female genital tract infections in adolescents. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2002;15:217–226. 141. Fraser IS, Critchley HO, Munro MG. Abnormal uterine bleeding: getting our terminology straight. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2007;19:591–595. 142. Fraser IS, Warner P, Marantos PA. Estimating menstrual blood loss in women with normal and excessive menstrual ﬂuid volume. Obstet Gynecol 2001;98(Pt 1):806–814. 143. ACOG Practice Bulletin. Management of anovulatory bleeding. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2001;72:263–271.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Committee Opinion No. 614, December, 2014, Reairmed 2016d

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of earlyonset group B streptococcal disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 485, April 2011, Reairmed 2016e

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B9, varicella zoster, and toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 151, June 2015, Reairmed 2017

Andrade M, Reed SL: Amebiasis and infection with free-living amebas. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison's Principles ofInternal Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2015, p. 1363

Arabi YM, Balkhy HH, Hayden FG, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med 376(6):584,t2017

Arvin AM, Fast P, Myers M, et al: Vaccine development to prevent cytomegalovirus disease: report from the National Vaccine Advisory Committee. Clin Infect Dis 39:233, 2004

Assiri A, Abedi GR, Al Masri M, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection during pregnancy: a report of 5 cases from Saudi Arabia. Clin Infect Dis 63(7):951, 2016

Auriti C, Piersigilli F, De Gasperis MR, et al: Congenital varicella syndrome: still a problem? Fetal Diagn Ther 25(2):224, 2009

Azam AZ, Vial Y, Fawer CL, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Obstet Gynecol 97:443, 2001

Badell ML, Meaney-Delman D, Tuuli MG, et al: Risks associated with smallpox vaccination in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1439,t2015

Bates T: Poliomyelitis in pregnancy, fetus and newborn. Am J Dis Child 90: 189, 1955

Baud D, Greub G: Intracellular bacteria and adverse pregnancy outcomes.
J Clin Microbiol 53(5):1719,t2015

Forcade NA, Wiederhold NP, Ryan L, et al: Antibacterials as adjuncts to incision and drainage for adults with purulent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections. Drugs 72:339, 2012

Forsnes EV, Eggleston MK, WaxJR: Diferential transmission of adenovirus in a twin pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol , 1998

Fowler KB, Stagno S, Pass RF, et al: The outcome of congenital cytomegalovirus infection in relation to maternal antibody status. N Engl J Med 326:663, 1992

Fowler KB, Stagno S, Pass F: Maternal immunity and prevention of congenital cytomegalovirus infection. J1A 289: 1 008, 2003

Fowler SL: A light in the darkness: predicting outcomes for congenital cytomegalovirus infections. J Pediatr 137:4, 2000

Fragiadakis GK, Baca QJ, Gherardini PF, et al: Mapping the fetomaternal peripheral immune system at term pregnancy. J Immunol 197(11):4482, 2016

Freedman DO, Chen LH, Kozarsky PE: Medical considerations before international travel. N Engl J Med 375(3):247, 2016

Freeman K, Oakley L, Pollak A, et al: Association between congenital toxoplasmosis and preterm birth, low birthweight and small for gestational age birth. BJOG 112:31,2005

Gimovsky AC, Macri CJ: Leprosy in pregnant woman, United States. Emerg Infect Dis 19:10,t2013

Gotwitz J, Kruszon-Moran 0, McAllister SK: Changes in the prevalence of nasal colonization with Staphylococcus aureus in the United States, 20012004. J Infect Dis 197:1226,t2008

Grant GB, Reef SE, Dabbagh A, et al: Global progress roward rubella and congenital rubella syndrome control and elimination-2004-2014. MMWR 64(37):1052,t2015

Granwehr BP, Lillibridge M, Higgs S, et al: West Nile virus: where are we now? Lancet Infect Dis 4:547,t2004

Guerra B, Lazzarotto T, Quarta S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Am J Obstet GynecoIt183:476, 2000 Hamilton SM, Stevens DL, Bryant AE: Pregnancy-related Group A streptococcal infections: temporal relationship between bacterial acquisition, infection onset, clinical findings, and outcome. Clin Infect Dis 0,t2013

Harjulehto T, Aro T, Hovi T, et al: Congenital malformations and oral poliovirus vaccination during pregnancy.
Pos-sible bacteria that may be responsible for the patient’s symptoms are methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus sp., and enteric Gram-negative rods that are resistant to ciprofloxacin such as ESBL-positive E coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae, or other hospital-acquired Gram negative organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient was treated with vancomycin and meropenem, and blood and urine cultures were both positive for ESBL-positive E coli that was resistant to ciprofloxacin. The patient defervesced and hemodynamically stabilized over the subsequent 48 hours. ESBL-positive E coli is an emerging urinary tract pathogen that may be acquired in the outpatient setting, and oral antibiotic therapy may not reliably be effective; empiric therapy with a carbapenem (ertapenem, doripenem, meropenem, imipenem) is recom-mended for serious infections due to this organism. Philip J. Rosenthal, MD

A 5-year-old American girl presents with a 1-week history of intermittent chills, fever, and sweats. She had returned home 2 weeks earlier after leaving the USA for the first time to spend 3 weeks with her grandparents in Nigeria. She received all standard childhood immunizations, but no additional treat-ment before travel, since her parents have returned to their native Nigeria frequently without medical consequences. Three days ago, the child was seen in an outpatient clinic and diagnosed with a viral syndrome. Examination reveals a lethargic child, with a temperature of 39.8°C (103.6°F) and splenomegaly. She has no skin rash or lymphadenopathy. Ini-tial laboratory studies are remarkable for hematocrit 29.8%, platelets 45,000/mm3, creatinine 2.5 mg/dL (220 μmol/L), and mildly elevated bilirubin and transaminases. A blood smear shows ring forms of Plasmodium falciparum at 1.5% parasit-emia. What treatment should be started? Malaria is the most important parasitic disease of humans and causes hundreds of millions of illnesses per year. Four species of plasmodium typically cause human malaria: Plasmodium falciparum, P vivax, P malariae, and P ovale.
Descriptions of normal appearance and alertness include child looking at the observer and looking around the room, with eyes that are shiny or bright. Descriptions that indicate severe impairment include glassy eyes and stares vacantly into space. Observations such as sitting, moving arms and legs on table or lap, and sits without support reflect normal motor ability, whereas no movement in mother’s arms and lies limply on tableindicate severe impairment. Normal behaviors, such as vocalizing spontaneously, playing with objects, reaching for objects, smiling, and crying with noxious stimuli, reflect playfulness; abnormal behaviors reflect irritability. Normally, crying children are consolable and stop crying when held by the parent, whereas severe impairment is indicated by continual cry despite being held and comforted. Children between 2 months and 3 years of age are atincreased risk for infection with organisms with polysaccharide capsules, including S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, N. meningitidis, and nontyphoidal Salmonella. Effective phagocytosisof these organisms requires opsonic antibody. Transplacentalmaternal IgG initially provides immunity to these organisms,but as the IgG gradually dissipates, risk of infection increases.In the United States, use of conjugate H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae vaccines has dramatically reduced the incidence of these infections. Determining the child’s immunization status is essential to evaluate risk of these infections. An approach to evaluation of these children is outlined inFigure 96-1. Most episodes of fever in children younger than 3 years of age have a demonstrable source of infection elicited by history, physical examination, or a simple laboratory test. In this age group, the most commonly identified serious bacterial infection is a UTI. A blood culture to evaluate for occult bacteremia, and urinalysis and urine culture to evaluate for a UTI, should be considered for all children younger than 3 years of age with fever without localizing signs. Stool culture should be obtained in those with diarrhea marked by blood or mucous. Ill-appearing children should be admitted to the hospital and treated with empirical antibiotics.
By this age, an exclusivelybreastfed infant requires additional sources of severalnutrients, including protein, iron, and zinc. Cereals commonly are mixed with breast milk, formula, or water andlater with fruits. To help identify possible allergies or foodintolerances that may arise when new foods are added tothe diet, single-grain cereals (rice, oatmeal, barley) are recommended as starting cereals. If juice is given, it shouldbe started only after 6 months of age, be given in a cup (asopposed to a bottle), and limited to 4 oz daily of 100% natural unsweetened juice. An infant should never be put tosleep with a bottle or cup filled with milk, formula, or juicebecause this can result in Early Childhood Caries (ECC)(see Chapter 127). Green vegetables bring nutrients, vitamin, minerals, and micronutrients. Children should get two to three servings of vegetables. For infants with a strong family history of food allergy, foods with high allergic potential, such as fish, peanuts, tree nuts, dairy products, and eggs, should probably be avoided. All foods with the potential to obstruct the young infant’s main airway should be avoided in general until 4 years of age or older. Because of the risk of infant botulism, honey should not be given before 1 year of age. Commercially prepared or homemade foods help meet the nutritional needs of the infant. If the introduction of solid foods is delayed, nutritional deficiencies can develop, and oral sensory issues (texture and oral aversion) may occur. General signs of readiness include the ability to hold the head up, maturity (around double the birth weight), opening their mouths wide, showing eager anticipation of eating food and interest in foods, sitting unassisted, bringing objects to the mouth, and the ability to track a spoon. The choice of foods to meet micro-nutrient needs is less critical for formula. Caries are tooth infections that start as early as when the deciduous teeth (baby teeth) have erupted.
They have normal strength and cognition and achieve motor and mental milestones normally. They may have peculiar postures of their feet or unusual gaits. Infants with benign congenital hypotonia typically exhibit the condition at 6 to 12 months old with delayed gross motor skills. They are unable to sit, creep, or crawl, but have good verbal, social, and manipulative skills. Strength appears normal, and the infants can kick arms and legs briskly and bring their toes to their mouths. The children often display head lag, slip-through in ventral suspension, and floppiness of passive tone. The infant seems floppy from birth. The differential diagnosis includes upper and motor neuron disorders and connective tissue diseases. Extensive laboratory investigation is often unrevealing. Most of these children catch up to peers and

Severe brain illness* Structural (hydrocephalus) Infectious Metabolic (e.g., anoxia or hypoglycemia) Intoxication through mother

Connective tissue disorder Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Marfan syndrome Congenital laxity of ligaments *Common. appear normal by 3 years of age. Often, other family members have exhibited a similar developmental pattern. The incidence of pediatric stroke is 2.5 to 10 per 100,000 children and is higher among neonates, approaching that of elderly patients. A wide spectrum of conditions can produce stroke in childhood (Table 182-5). Pediatric strokes may be due to ischemia (arterial ischemic stroke, cerebral sinovenous thrombosis) or hemorrhage.
The integrity of these functions in the neonate is most reliably assessed by noting the following, as was described in Chap. 27: 1. Control of respiration and body temperature; regulation of thirst, fluid balance, and appetite–hypothalamus–brainstem mechanisms 2. Certain elemental automatisms, such as sucking, rooting, swallowing, grasping—brainstem–cerebellar mechanisms 3. Movements and postures of the neck, trunk, and limbs, such as reactions of support, extension of the neck and trunk, flexion movements, and steppage—lower brainstem (reticulospinal), cerebellar, and spinal mechanisms 4. Muscle tone of limbs and trunk—spinal neuronal and neuromuscular function 5. Reflex eye movements—tegmental midbrain and pontine mechanisms (a modified optokinetic nystagmus can be recognized by the third day of life) 6. The state of alertness and attention (stimulus responsivity and capacity of the examiner to make contact) as well as sleep–waking and electroencephalographic patterns—mesencephalic–diencephalic mechanisms 7. Certain reflexive reactions such as the startle (Moro) response and placing reactions of the foot and hand—upper brainstem–spinal mechanisms with possible cortical facilitation

Derangements of these functions are manifest as impairments of alertness and arousal, hypotonia, disturbances of ocular movement (oscillations of the eyes, nystagmus, loss of tonic conjugate deviation of the eyes in response to vestibular stimulation, i.e., to rotation of the upright infant), failure to feed, tremors, clonic jerkings, tonic spasms, opisthotonos, diminution or absence of limb movements, irregular or chaotic breathing, hypothermia or poikilothermia, bradycardia, circulatory difficulties, poor color, and seizures. In most instances of neonatal metabolic disease, the pregnancy and delivery proceed without mishap. Birth at full term is usual. The infant is of a size and weight expected for the duration of pregnancy, and there are no signs of a developmental abnormality (in a few instances the infant is somewhat small, and in GM1 gangliosidosis there may be a pseudo-Hurler appearance; see further on). Furthermore, function continues to be normal in the first few days of life. The first hint of trouble may be the occurrence of feeding difficulties: food intolerance, diarrhea, and vomiting. The infant becomes fretful and fails to gain weight and thrive—all of which should suggest a disorder of amino acid, ammonia, or organic acid metabolism.
Younger infants and patients with more severe or prolonged hypoglycemia are at greatest risk for adverse outcomes. Normal regulation of serum glucose concentrations requires appropriate interaction of a number of hormonal signals and metabolic pathways (Figure 172-1). In a normal individual, a decrease in serum glucose concentrations leads to a suppression of insulin secretion and increased secretion of the counterregulatory hormones (growth hormone [GH], cortisol, glucagon, and epinephrine) (see Fig. 172-1). This hormonal signal promotes the release of amino acids (particularly alanine) from muscle to fuel gluconeogenesis and the release of triglyceride from adipose tissue stores to provide free fatty acids (FFAs) for hepatic ketogenesis. FFAs and ketones serve as alternate fuels for muscle. This hormonal signal also stimulates the breakdown of hepatic glycogen and promotes gluconeogenesis. Failure of any of the components of this hormonal signal can lead to hypoglycemia. Available @ StudentConsult.com

A lack of suppression of insulin secretion in response to low serum glucose concentrations can occur in infants but is uncommon beyond the neonatal period. This situation arises most frequently in infants of diabetic mothers who were exposed to high concentrations of maternally derived glucose in utero, resulting in fetal islet cell hyperplasia. The hyperinsulinemic state is transient, usually lasting hours to days. Hyperinsulinism that persists beyond a few days of agecan result from distinct genetic disorders affecting glucose-regulated insulin release. These were previously referred to

Infant of a diabetic mother Infant with erythroblastosis fetalis Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia

Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency Amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency Liver phosphorylase deficiency Glycogen synthase deficiency

Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency

Long-, medium-, or short-chain fatty acid acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency Carnitine deficiency (primary or secondary) Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency

Global hepatic dysfunction Reye syndrome Hepatitis Heart failure Sepsis, shock

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; acyl-CoA, acyl coenzyme A; IGF-2, insulin-like growth factor-2. as nesidioblastosis, or persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of the newborn. In these infants, hyperplasia ofthe pancreatic islet cells develops in the absence of excessstimulation by maternal diabetes.
NSAID have no effect on phospholipases. 7.2. An infant, born at 28 weeks’ gestation, rapidly gave evidence of respiratory distress. Clinical laboratory and imaging results supported the diagnosis of infant respiratory distress syndrome. Which of the following statements about this syndrome is true? A. It is unrelated to the baby’s premature birth. B. It is a consequence of too few type II pneumocytes. C. The lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio in the amniotic fluid is likely to be high (>2). D. The concentration of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine in the amniotic fluid would be expected to be lower than that of a full-term baby. E. It is an easily treated disorder with low mortality. F. It is treated by administering surfactant to the mother just before she gives birth. Correct answer = D. Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC or, dipalmitoyl lecithin) is the lung surfactant found in mature, healthy lungs. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) can occur in lungs that make too little of this compound.
Correct answer = D. Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC or, dipalmitoyl lecithin) is the lung surfactant found in mature, healthy lungs. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) can occur in lungs that make too little of this compound. If the lecithin/sphingomyelin (L/S) ratio in amniotic fluid is ≥2, a newborn’s lungs are considered to be sufficiently mature (premature lungs would be expected to have a ratio <2). The RDS would not be due to too few type II pneumocytes, which would simply be secreting sphingomyelin rather than DPPC at 28 weeks’ gestation. The mother is given a glucocorticoid, not surfactant, prior to giving birth (antenatally). Surfactant would be administered to the baby postnatally to reduce surface tension. 7.3. A 10-year-old boy was evaluated for burning sensations in his feet and clusters of small, red-purple spots on his skin. Laboratory studies revealed protein in his urine. Enzymatic analysis revealed a deficiency of αgalactosidase, and enzyme replacement therapy was recommended. The most likely diagnosis is:

A. Fabry disease. B. Farber disease. C. Gaucher disease. D. Krabbe disease. E. Niemann-Pick disease.
Before tests of fetal health and maturity became available, delivery before term was deliberately selected for women with diabetes to avoid unexplained stillbirth. Although this practice has been abandoned, a higher frequency of preterm delivery in women with diabetes persists. Most are indicated deliveries due to advanced diabetes with superimposed preeclampsia. hat said, Little and associates (2015) in their analysis of early-term delivery (37°/7 to 386/7 weeks) found a 13-percent reduction in such deliveries in women with diabetes between 2005 and 2011. Although modern neonatal care has reduced neonatal death rates due to immaturity, neonatal morbidiy due to preterm birth continues to be a serious consequence. In one Neonatal Research Network study of 10,781 extremely preterm neonates, those born to diabetic women treated with insulin prior to pregnancy were at greater risk for necrotizing enterocolitis and late-onset sepsis than neonates of mothers without diabetes (Boghossian, 2016). Respiratory Distress Syndrome. Gestational age rather than overt diabetes is likely the most significant factor associated with respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 33, p. 619). Indeed, in one analysis of 19,399 very-Iow-birthweight neonates delivered between 24 and 33 weeks' gestation, rates of respiratory distress syndrome in newborns of diabetic mothers were not higher compared with rates in neonates of nondiabetic mothers (Bental, 2011). Hypoglycemia. Newborns of a diabetic mother experience a rapid drop in plasma glucose concentration after delivery. This is attributed to hyperplasia of the fetal �-islet cells induced by chronic maternal hyperglycemia. Low glucose concentrationsdefined as <45 mg/dL-are particularly common in newborns of women with unstable glucose concentrations during labor (Persson, 2009). Frequent blood glucose measurements in the newborn and active early feeding practices can mitigate these complications.
Diabetes Care 40(1 Suppl):S005, 2017a

American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes-2013. Diabetes Care 36(Suppl 1):Sll, 2013

American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes-20 17. Diabetes Care 40(1 Suppl):S 114, 2017b

Arun CS, Taylor R: Influence of pregnancy on long-term progression of retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 51: 1041, 2008

Bacon S, Schmid], McCarthy A, et al: The clinical management ofhyperglycemia in pregnancy complicated by maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Am ] Obstet GynecoIt213(2):236.e1, 2015

Balsells v!, Garda-Patterson A, Sola I, et al: Glibenclamide, metformin, and insulin for the treatment of gestational diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BM] 350:h102, 2015

Bantle ]P, Wylie-Rosettt], Albright AL, et al: Nutrition recommendations and interventions for diabetes. Diabetes Care 31(1 Suppl):S61, 2008

Bargiota A, Kotoula M, Tsironi E, et al: Diabetic papillopathy in pregnancy. Obstet GynecoItI18:457, 2011

BartSch E, Medcalf KE, Park L, et al: Clinical risk factors for pre-eclampsia determined in early pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis of large cohort studies. BM] 353:i 1 53, 2016

Bennett SN, Tita A, Owen ], et al: Assessing White's classification of pregestational diabetes in a contemporary diabetic population. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1217,t2015

Bental Y, Reichman B, Shif Y, et al: Impact of maternal diabetes mellitus on mortality and morbidity of preterm infants (24-33 weeks gestation). Pediatrics 128:e848, 2011

Boghossian NS, Hansen NI, Bell EF, et al: Outcomes of extremely preteI'm infants born to insulin-dependent diabetic mothers. Pediatrics 137(6):e20 153424, 2016 Bradley R], Nicolaides KH, Brudenell ]M: Are all infants of diabetic mothers "macrosomic"? BM] 297:1583, 1988

Bryant SN, Herrera CL, Nelson DB, et al: Diabetic ketoacidosis complicating pregnancy.t] Neonatal Perinatal Med ,t2017

Buhling K], Doll I, Siebert G, et al: Relationship between sonographically estimated fetal subcutaneous adipose tissue measurements and neonatal skinfold measurements. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39:558, 2012

Caritis SN, Hebert MF: A pharmacologic approach to the use of glyburide in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 121(6):1309,t2013

Casey BM, Duryea EL, Abbassi-Ghanavati M, et al: Glyburide in women with mild gestational diabetes: a randomized controlled trial.
Gestational diabetes is typically asymptomatic, so the f rst step in diagnosis is a one-hour glucose challenge at 24–28 weeks. If ≥ 140 mg/dL, perform a three-hour glucose challenge test. Keys to the management of gestational diabetes: (1) the ADA diet; (2) insulin if needed; (3) ultrasound for fetal growth; and (4) NST beginning at 30–32 weeks. First step: Administer vitamin B6. Second step: Doxylamine (an antihistamine) PO. Third step: Promethazine or dimenhydrinate PO/PR. If severe: Metoclopramide, ondansetron, prochlorperazine, or promethazine IM/PO. If dehydrated: IV fuids, IV nutritional supplementation, and dimenhydrinate IV. Diabetes in pregnancy is divided into two categories: gestational diabetes, in which onset occurs during pregnancy, and pregestational diabetes. The White classif cation (see Table 2.11-12) is commonly used to classify women according to the nature of their diabetes and the associated risk. Carbohydrate intolerance of variable severity that is frst diagnosed during pregnancy. Occurs in 3–5% of all pregnancies, usually in late pregnancy. Typically asymptomatic. Edema, polyhydramnios, or a large-for-GA infant (> 90th percentile) may be warning signs. First step: One-hour 50-g glucose challenge test; venous plasma glucose is measured one hour later (at 24–28 weeks).
Pharmacological relaxation by general anesthesia or intravenous magnesium sulfate, nitroglycerin, or a betamimetic agent may be required. To begin, two ingers are carried up along one leg to externally rotate the hip by pressing on the medial side of the thigh parallel to the femur. Simultaneously, pressure in the popliteal fossa should prompt spontaneous knee flexion, which brings the corresponding foot into contact with the back of the provider's hand. he fetal foot then may be grasped and brought down. With version, fetal presentation is altered by physically substituting one pole of a longitudinal presentation for the other, or converting an oblique or transverse lie into a longitudinal presentation. Manipulations performed through the abdominal wall that yield a cephalic presentation are termed external cephalic version. Manipulations accomplished inside the uterine cavity that yield a breech presentation are designated intenal podalic version. This latter procedure is reserved for delivery of a second twin and described in Chapter 45 (p. 890). External cephalic version (ECy) reduces the rate of noncephalic presentation at birth (Hofmeyr, 2015b). For breech fetuses near term, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016a,b) recommends that version be ofered and attempted whenever possible. Its success rate averages about 60 percent (de Hundt, 2014). For women with a transverse lie, the overall success rate is significantly higher. In general, ECV is attempted before labor in a woman who has reached 37 weeks' gestation. Before this time, breech pre sentation still has a high likelihood of correcting spontaneously. And, if ECV is performed too early, time may allow a rever sion back to breech (Bogner, 2012).
J Ultrasound Med 2(8):373, 1983

Pinard A: On version by external maneuvers. In Traite du Palper Abdominal. Paris, Lauwereyns, 1889

Raju TN, Mercer BM, Burchfield OJ, et al: Periviable birth: executive summary of a joint workshop by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Academy of Pediatrics, and merican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet GynecoIr123(5):1083, 2014 Reddy UM, Zhang J, Sun L, et al: Neonatal mortality by attempted route of delivery in early preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(2): 117.e1, 2012 Rietberg CC, Elferink-Stinkens PM, Visser GH: The efect of the Term Breech Trial on medical intervention behaviour and neonatal outcome in he Netherlands: an analysis of35,453 term breech infants. BJOG 112(2):205,r2005 Rodgers R, Beik N, Nassar N, et al: Complications of external cephalic version: a retrospective analysis of 1121 patients at a tertiary hospital in Sydney. BJOG 124(5):767,r201 Rojansky N, Tanos V, Lewin A, et al: Sonographic evaluation of fetal head extension and maternal pelvis in cases of breech presentation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73:607, 1994 Roman H, Carayol M, Watier L, et al: Planned vaginal delivery of fetuses in breech presentation at term: prenatal determinants predictive of elevated risk of cesarean delivery during labor. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Bioi 138(1):14,r2008

Rosman AN, Guijt A, Vlemmix F, et al: Contraindications for external cephalic version in breech position at term: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(2):137,r2013 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: he management of breech presentation. RCOG Green Top Guidelines, No. 20b. London, 2006 Sananes N, Roth GE, issi GA, et al: Acupuncture version of breech presentation: a randomized sham-controlled single-blinded trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Bioi 204:24, 2016 Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: 12 years of recorded experience. Obstet GynecoIr93:312, 1999

Sandberg EC: he Zavanelli maneuver extended: progression of a revolutionary concept.
Br J Anaesth 114(6):944,r2015

Kok M, Bais JM, van Lith JM, et al: Nifedipine as a uterine relaxant for external cephalic version: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 112(2 Pt 1):271,r2008

Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, et al: Ultrasound factors to predict the orcome of external cephalic version: a meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 33(1):76, 2009

Kok M, van der Steeg JW, van der Post JA, et al: Prediction of success of external cephalic version after 36 weeks. Am J Perinatol 28(2): 103, 2011

Kotaska A, Menticoglou S, Gagnon R: SOGC clinical practice guideline: vaginal delivery of breech presentation: No. 226, June 2009. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 107(2):169,r2009

Kuppens SM, Hurron EK, Hasaart TH, et al: Mode of delivery following successful external cephalic version: comparison with spontaneous cephalic presentations at delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 35(10):883, 2013

Lamrani YA, Maaroui M, Kamaoui I, et al: Neonatal distal femoral epiphyseal dislocation: an ultrasound diagnosis. J Med Ultrason 38(4):221, 2011 Lennox CE, Kwast BE, Farley TM: Breech labor on the WHO partograph. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 62(2): , 1998

Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M, Gulmezoglu M, et al: Method of delivelY and pregnancy ourcomes in Asia: the WHO global survey on maternal and perinatal health 2007-08. Lancet 375(9713):490,r2010

Lydon-Rochelle M, Albers L, GorwodaJ, et al: Accracy of Leopold maneuvers in screening for malpresentation: a prospective study. Birth 20:132, 1993 Lyons J, Pressey T, Bartholomew S, et al: Delivery of breech presentation at term gestation in Canada, 2003-201 1. Obstet GynecoIr125(5):1153, 2015

Macharey G, Gissler M, Rahkonen L, et al: Breech presentation at term and associated obstetric risks factors-a nationwide population based cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):833,r2017

Macharey G, Ulander VM, Heinonen S, et al: Induction of labor in breech presentations at term: a retrospective observational study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 293(3):549,r2016

Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Di Tommaso M, et al: Neuraxial analgesia to increase the success rate of external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):276,r2016

Marzouk P, Arnaud E, Oury JF, et al: Induction of labour and breech presentation: experience of a French maternity ward.
Improved aeration of lung fields bilaterally is noted as pleural disease resolves (arrows). c. Markedly improved visualization of the lung fields with residual platelike atelectasis and normal appearance of the diaphragm. TABLE 53-2. Management of the Pregnant Woman with Acute Pyelonephritis

Evaluate hemogram, serum creatinine, and electrolytes

Monitor vital signs frequently, including urinary output-

Establish urinary output �50 mL/hr with intravenous

Obtain chest radiograph if there is dyspnea or tachypnea

Change to oral antimicrobials when afebrile

Discharge when afebrile 24 hours, consider antimicrobial therapy for 7 to 10 days

Repeat urine culture 1 to 2 weeks after antimicrobial

Modified from Lucas, 1994; Sheffield, 2005. Endotoxin-induced hemoysis is common, and approximately a third of these women with pyelonephritis develop anemia (Cox, 1991). With recovery, hemoglobin regeneration is normal, and acute infection does not afect erythropoietin production (Cavenee, 1994). One scheme for management of acute pyelonephritis is shown in Table 53-2. Urine cultures are taken, but prospective trials show that blood cultures are of limited clinical utility (Gomi, 2015; Wing, 2000). We obtain blood cultures if the temperature is >39°C. Intravenous hydration to ensure adequate urinay ouput is the cornerstone of treatment. Antimicrobials are also begun promptly with the caveat that they may initially worsen endotoxemia from bacterial lysis. Surveillance for worsening sepsis syndrome includes serial monitoring of urinary output, blood pressure, pulse, temperature, and oxygen saturation. High fevers are lowered with a cooling blanket and acetaminophen. his is especially important in early pregnancy because of possible teratogenic efects from hyperthermia. Antimicrobial therapy usually is empirical, and ampicillin plus gentamicin; cefazolin or ceftriaxone; or an extended-spectrum antibiotic are all 95-percent efective in randomized trials (Sanchez-Ramos, 1995; Wing, 1998,a2000).
Acupunct Med 31(1):31,r2013 Velzel J, Vlemmix F, Opmeer Be, et al: Atosiban versus fenoterol as a uterine relaxant for external cephalic version: a randomised controlled trial. BMJ 26:356,r2017 Velzel J, de Hundt M, Mulder FM, et al: Prediction models for successful external cephalic version: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod BioI 195:160,r2015

Vendittelli F, Pons Je, Lemery 0, et al: he term breech presentation: neonatal results and obstetric practices in France. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod BioI 125(2):176,r2006

Vezina Y, Bujold E, Varin J, et al: Cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic version of breech presentation at term: a comparative study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:763,r2004

Vialle R, Pietin-Vialle C, Ilharreborde B, et al: Spinal cord injuries at birth: a multicenter review of nine cases. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20(6):435, 2007

Vistad I, Klungs0yr K, Albrechtsen S, et al: Neonatal outcome of singleton term breech deliveries in N otway from 1991 to 2011. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(9):997, 2015

Weill Y, Pollack N: he eicacy and safery of external cephalic version after a previous caesarean delivery. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 57(3):323, 2017 Weiniger CF, Ginosar Y, Elchalal U, et al: Randomized controlled trial of external cephalic version in term multiparae with or without spinal analgesia. Br J Anaesth 104(5):613,r2010 Wery E, Le Roch A, Subtil 0: Zavanelli maneuver performed in a breech presentation. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 120(2):193,2013 Westgren M, Grundsell H, Ingemarsson I, et al: Hyperextension of the fetal head in breech presentation. A study with long-term follow-up. BJOG 88(2):101, 1981 Whyte H, Hannah ME, Saigal S, et al: Outcomes of children at 2 years after planned cesarean birth versus planned vaginal birth for breech presentation at term: the International Randomized Term Breech Trial. Am J Obstet GynecoIr191(3):864,r2004 Wilcox CB, Nassar N, RobertS CL: Efectiveness of nifedipine tocolysis to facilitate external cephalic version: a systematic review. BJOG 118(4):423,2011 Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hofman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap's Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed.
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified. A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up. The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis. The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made (squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging procedure. Staging of any malignancy is important because it determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third esophageal tumor. The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to the liver. Bleeding was the cause of the anemia. Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably friable, and with the passage of digested material across the tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs.
Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens. For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine). Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes.
Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory.
(Image courtesy of Dr. Jeff Fidler; with permission.) a virtual “flight” along the colonic lumen, simulating colonoscopy (Fig. 345-46). Comparative studies of virtual and routine colonoscopy have shown conflicting results, but technical refinements have improved the performance characteristics of VC. The use of VC for colorectal cancer screening may become more widespread in the future, particularly at institutions with demonstrated skill with this technique. Findings detected during virtual colonoscopy often require subsequent conventional colonoscopy for confirmation and treatment. Most cases of diarrhea are acute, self-limited, and due to infections or medication. Chronic diarrhea (lasting >6 weeks) is more often due to a primary inflammatory, malabsorptive, or motility disorder; is less likely to resolve spontaneously; and generally requires diagnostic evaluation. Patients with chronic diarrhea or severe, unexplained acute diarrhea often undergo endoscopy if stool tests for pathogens are unrevealing. The choice of endoscopic testing depends on the clinical setting. Patients with colonic symptoms and findings such as bloody diarrhea, tenesmus, fever, or leukocytes in stool generally undergo sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy to assess for colitis (Fig. 345-4). Sigmoidoscopy is an appropriate initial test in most patients. Conversely, patients with symptoms and findings suggesting small-bowel disease, such as large-volume watery stools, substantial weight loss, and malabsorption of iron, calcium, or fat, may undergo upper endoscopy with duodenal aspirates for assessment of bacterial overgrowth and biopsies for assessment of mucosal diseases, such as celiac sprue. Many patients with chronic diarrhea do not fit either of these patterns.
Neurologic disease presents with papilledema, visual field loss, or focal neural abnormalities. Neoplasm is suggested by palpation of masses or adenopathy. For intractable symptoms or an elusive diagnosis, selected screening tests can direct clinical care. Electrolyte replacement is indicated for hypokalemia or metabolic alkalosis. Iron-deficiency anemia mandates a search for mucosal injury. Pancreaticobiliary disease is indicated by abnormal pancreatic or liver biochemistries, whereas endocrinologic, rheumatologic, or paraneoplastic etiologies are suggested by hormone or serologic abnormalities. If bowel obstruction is suspected, supine and upright abdominal radiographs may show intestinal air-fluid levels with reduced colonic air. Ileus is characterized by diffusely dilated air-filled bowel loops. CHAPTER 54 Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion

Anatomic studies may be indicated if initial testing is nondiagnostic. Upper endoscopy detects ulcers, malignancy, and retained gastric food residue in gastroparesis. Small-bowel barium radiography or computed tomography (CT) diagnoses partial bowel obstruction. Colonoscopy or contrast enema radiography detects colonic obstruction. Ultrasound or CT defines intraperitoneal inflammation; CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enterography provide superior definition of inflammation in Crohn’s disease. CT or MRI of the head can delineate intracranial disease. Mesenteric angiography, CT, or MRI is useful for suspected ischemia.
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals are found in the cartilage in some cases of acromegaly arthropathy and, when shed into the joint, can elicit attacks of pseudogout. Chondrocalcinosis may be observed on radiographs. Back pain is extremely common, perhaps as a result of spine hyper-mobility. Spine radiographs show normal or widened intervertebral disk spaces, hypertrophic anterior osteophytes, and ligamental calcification. The latter changes are similar to those observed in patients with diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Dorsal kyphosis in conjunction with elongation of the ribs contributes to the development of the barrel chest seen in acromegalic patients. The hands and feet become enlarged as a result of soft tissue proliferation. The fingers are thickened and have spadelike distal tufts. One-third of patients have a thickened heel pad. Approximately 25% of patients exhibit Raynaud’s phenomenon.Carpaltunnelsyndromeoccursinabouthalfofpatients. The median nerve is compressed by excess connective tissue in the carpal tunnel. Patients with acromegaly may develop proximal muscle weakness, which is thought to be caused by the effect of growth hormone on muscle. Serum muscle enzyme levels and electromyographic findings arenormal. Muscle biopsy specimens containmuscle fibers of varying size without inflammation. Hemochromatosis is a disorder of iron storage.
Osteoarthritis. Plain radiographs show joint space narrowing, osteophytes, and subchondral degenerative cysts involving the DIP and PIP joints, with sparing of the MCP. (Reproduced, with permission, from USMLERx.com.) A pain syndrome accompanied by loss of function and autonomic dysfunction, usually occurring after trauma. Formerly known as reﬂ ex sympathetic dystrophy. The disease has three phases: acute sympathetic denervation and underactivity → dystrophic phase → atrophic phase. Diffuse pain occurs out of proportion to the initial injury, often in a nonanatomic distribution. Pain can occur at any time relative to the initial injury. Loss of function of the affected limb is seen. Sympathetic dysfunction occurs and may be documented by skin, soft tissue, or blood ﬂ ow changes. Skin temperature, hair growth, and nail growth may ↑ or ↓. Edema may be present. A clinical diagnosis, but objective evidence of changes in skin temperature, hair growth, or nail growth may be present. Medications include NSAIDs, corticosteroids, low-dose TCAs, gabapentin, pregabalin, and calcitonin (no oral medications are consistently effective). Physical therapy modalities such as heat, ice, desensitization techniques, and gentle ROM exercises may be helpful.
Fever, fatigue, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss may also be seen. Ulnar deviation of the fingers is seen with MCP joint hypertrophy (see Figure 2.9-6). Also presents with ligament and tendon deformations (e.g., swan-neck and boutonnière deformities), vasculitis, atlantoaxial subluxation (intubation risk), and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. F IGU R E 2.9-6. Rheumatoid arthritis. Note the boutonnière deformities of the digits, ulnar deviation of the fingers, MCP joint hyper trophy, and severe involvement of the PIP joints. (Reproduced, with permission, from Chan drasoma P. Concise Pathology, 3rd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1998: 978.) Labs: ■↑RF (IgM antibodies against Fc IgG) is seen in > 75% of cases. The presence of anti-CCP (cyclic citrullinated peptide) is more spe cific than RF. ■↑ ESR may also be seen. Anemia of chronic disease. Synovial ﬂuid aspirate shows turbid ﬂ uid, ↓ viscosity, and an ↑ WBC count (3000–50,000 cells/μL). Radiographs:

Early: Soft tissue swelling and juxta-articular demineralization. Late: Joint space narrowing and erosions.
(From JJ Cush et al: Evaluation of musculoskeletal complaints, in Rheumatology: Diagnosis and Therapeutics, 2nd ed, JJ Cush et al [eds]. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp 3–20. Used with permission from Dr. John J. Cush.) involving the base of the thumb (first carpometacarpal joint) is also highly suggestive of OA. By contrast, RA tends to cause symmetric, polyarticular involvement of the PIP, metacarpophalangeal (MCP), intercarpal, and carpometacarpal joints (wrist) with pain and palpable synovial tissue hypertrophy. Psoriatic arthritis may mimic the pattern of joint involvement seen in OA (DIP and PIP joints), but can be distinguished by the presence of inflammatory signs (erythema, warmth, synovial swelling), with or without carpal involvement, nail pitting, or onycholysis. Whereas lateral or medial subluxations at the PIP or DIP joints are most likely due to inflammatory OA or psoriatic arthritis, dorsal or ventral deformities (swan neck or boutonnière deformities) are typical of RA. Hemochromatosis should be considered when degenerative changes (bony hypertrophy) are seen at the second and third MCP joints with associated radiographic chondrocalcinosis or episodic, inflammatory wrist arthritis. Dactylitis manifests as soft tissue swelling of the whole digit and may have a sausage-like appearance. Common causes of dactylitis include psoriatic arthritis, spondyloarthritis, juvenile spondylitis, mixed connective tissue disease, scleroderma, sarcoidosis, and sickle cell disease. Soft tissue swelling over the dorsum of the hand and wrist may suggest an inflammatory extensor tendon tenosynovitis possibly caused by gonococcal infection, gout, or inflammatory arthritis (e.g., RA). Tenosynovitis is suggested by localized warmth, swelling, or pitting edema and may be confirmed when the soft tissue swelling tracks with tendon movement, such as flexion and extension of fingers, or when pain is induced while stretching the extensor tendon sheaths (flexing the digits distal to the MCP joints and maintaining the wrist in a fixed, neutral position). Focal wrist pain localized to the radial aspect may be caused by de Quervain’s tenosynovitis resulting from inflammation of the tendon sheath(s) involving the abductor pollicis longus or extensor pollicis brevis (Fig. 393-3).
What is the distribution of weakness? 3. What is the nature of the sensory involvement? -Temperature loss or burning or stabbing pain (e.g., small fiber) -Vibratory or proprioceptive loss (e.g., large fiber) 4. Is there evidence of upper motor neuron involvement? 5. What is the temporal evolution? Acute (days to 4 weeks)

Monophasic, progressive, or relapsing-remitting 6. Is there evidence for a hereditary neuropathy? Family history of neuropathy

Lack of sensory symptoms despite sensory signs 7. Are there any associated medical conditions? -Cancer, diabetes mellitus, connective tissue disease or other autoimmune diseases, infection (e.g., HIV, Lyme disease, leprosy)

Preceding events, drugs, toxins 2. What is the Distribution of Weakness? Delineating the pattern of weakness, if present, is essential for diagnosis, and in this regard two additional questions should be answered: (1) Does the weakness only involve the distal extremity, or is it both proximal and distal? and (2) Is the weakness focal and asymmetric, or is it symmetric?
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Patients with these conditions may deteriorate rapidly despite initially appearing well. The remaining population with non-cardiopulmonary conditions has a more favorable prognosis during completion of the diagnostic work-up. A rapid targeted assessment for a serious cardiopulmonary cause is of particular relevance for patients with acute ongoing pain who have presented for emergency evaluation. Among patients presenting in the outpatient setting with chronic pain or pain that has resolved, a general diagnostic assessment is reasonably undertaken (see “Outpatient Evaluation of Chest Discomfort,” below). A series of questions that can be used to structure the clinical evaluation of patients with chest discomfort is shown in Table 19-2. 1. Could the chest discomfort be due to an acute, potentially life-threatening condition that warrants urgent evaluation and management? 2. If not, could the discomfort be due to a chronic condition likely to lead to serious complications? 3. If not, could the discomfort be due to an acute condition that warrants specific treatment? 4. If not, could the discomfort be due to another treatable chronic condition? Esophageal reflux Cervical disk disease Esophageal spasm Arthritis of the shoulder or spine Peptic ulcer disease Costochondritis Gallbladder disease Other musculoskeletal disorders Other gastrointestinal conditions Anxiety state

Source: Developed by Dr. Thomas H. Lee for the 18th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. The evaluation of nontraumatic chest discomfort relies heavily on the clinical history and physical examination to direct subsequent diagnostic testing.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens. For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine). Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Ischemic bowel disease tends to occur in older adults with coexisting cardiac or vascular disease. Acute transmural infarction typically manifests with sudden, severe abdominal pain and tenderness, sometimes accompanied by nausea, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, or grossly melanotic stool. This presentation may progress to shock and vascular collapse within hours as a result of blood loss. Peristaltic sounds diminish or disappear, and muscular spasm creates boardlike rigidity of the abdominal wall. Because these physical signs overlap with those of other abdominal emergencies, including acute appendicitis, perforated ulcer, and acute cholecystitis, the diagnosis of intestinal infarction may be delayed or missed, with disastrous consequences. As the mucosal barrier breaks down, bacteria enter the circulation and sepsis can develop; the mortality rate in these cases may exceed 50%. The overall progression of ischemic enteritis depends on the underlying cause and severity of injury:

Mucosal and mural infarctions by themselves may not be fatal. However, these may progress to more extensive, transmural infarction if the vascular supply is not restored by correction of the insult or, in chronic disease, by development of adequate collateral supplies. Chronic ischemia may masquerade as inflammatory bowel disease, with episodes of bloody diarrhea interspersed with periods of healing. Fig. 15.20 Ischemia.(A)Characteristicattenuatedandpartiallydetachedvillousepitheliuminacutejejunalischemia.Notethehyperchromaticnucleiofproliferatingcryptcells.(B)Chroniccolonicischemiawithatrophicsurfaceepitheliumandfibroticlaminapropria. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection causes ischemic gastrointestinal disease as a consequence of the viral tropism for and infection of endothelial cells. CMV infection can be a complication of immunosuppressive therapy (Chapter 9). Radiation enterocolitis occurs when the gastrointestinal tract is irradiated. In addition to epithelial damage, radiation-induced vascular injury may be significant and produce changes that are similar to ischemic disease.
Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
In the absence of ATP, the sarcomeres cannot relax and get stuck in an agonal tetanic state. Thus, while reperfusion can salvage reversibly injured cells, it also alters the morphology of irreversibly injured cells. The classic MI is heralded by severe, crushing substernal chest pain (or pressure) that can radiate to the neck, jaw, epigastrium, or left arm. In contrast to angina pectoris, the associated pain typically lasts several minutes to hours, and is not relieved by nitroglycerin or rest. However, in a substantialminorityofpatients(10%to15%),MIspresentwith the atypical signs and symptoms, and may even be entirely asymptomatic. Such “silent” infarcts are particularly common in patients with underlying diabetes mellitus (in which autonomic neuropathy may prevent perception of pain) and in older adults. The pulse generally is rapid and weak, and patients are often diaphoretic (sweating) and nauseous (particularly with posterior wall MIs). Dyspnea is common, resulting from impaired myocardial contractility and dysfunction of the mitral valve apparatus, with resultant acute pulmonary congestion and edema. With massive MIs (involving more than 40% of the left ventricle), cardiogenic shock develops. Electrocardiographic abnormalities are important for the diagnosis of MI; these include Q waves, ST segment changes, and T wave inversions (the latter two representing abnormalities in myocardial repolarization). Arrhythmias caused by electrical abnormalities in the ischemic myocardium and conduction system are common; indeed, sudden cardiac death from a lethal arrhythmia accounts for the vast majority of MI-related deaths occurring before hospitalization. The laboratory evaluation of MI is based on measuring blood levels of macromolecules that leak out of injured myocardial cells through damaged cell membranes (

Fig. 11.13 ). These molecules include myoglobin, cardiac troponins T and I (TnT, TnI), creatine kinase (CK;

Fig. 11.12 Reperfusedmyocardialinfarction.(A)Thetransverseheartslice(stainedwithtriphenyltetrazoliumchloride)exhibitsalargeanteriorwallmyocardialinfarctionthatishemorrhagicbecauseofbleedingfromdamagedvessels.Theposteriorwallisatthetop.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
NSTEMI is diagnosed by serial cardiac enzymes and ECG. Acute treatment of symptoms is the same as that for stable angina. Clopidogrel, unfractionated heparin or enoxaparin, and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (e.g., eptifibatide, tirofiban, abciximab) should also be considered. Patients with chest pain refractory to medical therapy, a TIMI score of ≥ 3, a troponin elevation, or ST changes > 1 mm should be given heparin and scheduled for angiography and possible revascularization (percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI] or CABG). Think unstable angina if chest pain is new onset, accelerating, or occurring at rest. T AB LE 2.1 -1 0. TIMI Risk Score for Unstable Angina/NSTEMI

DEATH, MI, OR URGENT CHARACTERISTICS POINT RISK SCORE DEATH OR MI REVASCULARIZATION

History Age ≥ 65 years 1 0/1 3 5 ≥ 3 CAD risk factors (family history, DM, tobacco, hypertension, ↑ cholesterol) 1 2 3 8 Known CAD (stenosis > 50%) 1 3 5 13 ASA use in past seven days 1 4 7 20 Presentation 5 12 26 Severe angina (≥ 2 episodes within 24 hours) 1 6/7 19 41 ST deviation ≥ 0.5 mm 1 + cardiac marker 1 Risk score—total points (0–7)

Higher-risk patients (risk score ≥ 3) beneft more from enoxaparin (vs. unfractionated heparin), glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and early angiography. Defined as ST-segment elevations and cardiac enzyme release 2° to prolonged cardiac ischemia and necrosis. Presents with acute-onset substernal chest pain, commonly described as a pressure or tightness that can radiate to the left arm, neck, or jaw. Associated symptoms may include diaphoresis, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, anxiety, nausea/vomiting, and syncope. Physical exam may reveal arrhythmias, new mitral regurgitation (ruptured papillary muscle), hypotension (cardiogenic shock), and evidence of new CHF (rales, peripheral edema, S3 gallop). The best predictor of survival is left ventricular EF. ■ECG: Look for ST-segment elevations or new LBBB. ST-segment depressions in leads V1–V2 can also be reciprocal change indicating infarction in the posterior wall. Sequence of ECG changes: Peaked T waves → ST-segment elevation → Q waves → T-wave inversion → ST-segment normalization → T-wave normalization over several hours to days.
If a second agent is needed, one of the two agents should be a thiazide diuretic. Once blood pressure is controlled, patients should be followed periodically to reinforce the need for compliance with both lifestyle changes and medications. Bisoprolol Generic,Zebeta

Esmolol Generic,Brevibloc

Metoprolol Generic,Lopressor,Toprol-XL

Nadolol Generic, Corgard

VASODILATORS USED IN HYPERTENSION Diazoxide Hyperstat IV, Proglycem (oral for insulinoma)

Penbutolol Levatol Fenoldopam Corlopam Propranolol Generic, Inderal, Inderal LA

Hydralazine Generic,Apresoline

Pindolol Generic,Visken

Minoxidil Generic, Loniten

Nitroprusside Generic, Nitropress

Clonidine Generic, Catapres, Catapres-TTS

GuanabenzGeneric,Wytensin

Guanfacine Generic, Tenex

Felodipine Generic, Plendil

Diltiazem Generic,Cardizem,Cardizem CD, Cardizem SR, Dilacor XL

Isradipine Generic,DynaCirc,Dynacirc CR

Nicardipine Generic, Cardene, Cardene SR, Reserpine Generic

Captopril Generic,Capoten

Fosinopril Generic,Monopril

Moexipril Generic,Univasc

Quinapril Generic,Accupril

Candesartan Generic,Atacand

Irbesartan Generic,Avapro

Treatment of Angina Pectoris

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 56-year-old woman presents in the office with a history of recent-onset chest discomfort when jogging or swimming vigorously. The pain is dull but poorly localized; it disap-pears after 5–10 minutes of rest. She has never smoked but has a history of hyperlipidemia (total cholesterol level of 245 mg/dL and low-density lipoprotein [LDL] of 160 mg/dL recorded 1 year ago) and admits that she has not been fol-lowing the recommended diet. Her father survived a “heart attack” at age 55, and an uncle died of some cardiac disease at age 60. On physical examination, the patient’s blood pressure is 145/90 mm Hg, and her heart rate is 80 bpm. She is in no acute distress, and there are no other significant physical findings; an electrocardiogram is normal except for slight left ventricular hypertrophy. Assuming that a diagno-sis of stable effort angina is correct, what medical treatment should be implemented? Ischemic heart disease is one of the most common cardiovascular diseases in developed countries, and angina pectoris is the most common condition involving tissue ischemia in which vasodilator drugs are used. The name angina pectoris denotes chest pain caused by accumulation of metabolites resulting from myocardial ischemia. The organic nitrates, eg, nitroglycerin, are the mainstay of therapy for the immediate relief of angina. Another group of vasodilators, the calcium channel blockers, is also important, especially for prophylaxis, and β blockers, which are not vasodilators, are also useful in prophylaxis. Several newer drugs are available, including drugs that alter myocardial ion currents and selective cardiac rate inhibitors. By far, the most common cause of angina is atheromatous obstruction of the large coronary vessels (coronary artery disease, CAD).
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Microscopic hematuria may also appear with the onset of benign prostatic hypertrophy, interstitial nephritis, papillary necrosis, hypercalciuria, renal stones, cystic kidney diseases, or renal vascular injury. However, when red blood cell casts (see Fig. 62e-34) or dysmorphic red blood cells are found in the sediment, glomerulonephritis is likely. Sustained proteinuria >1–2 g/24 h is also commonly associated with glomerular disease. Patients often will not know they have proteinuria unless they become edematous or notice foaming urine on voiding. Sustained proteinuria has to be distinguished from lesser amounts of so-called benign proteinuria in the normal population (Table 338-1). This latter class of proteinuria is nonsustained, generally <1 g/24 h, and is sometimes called functional or transient proteinuria. Fever, exercise, obesity, sleep apnea, emotional stress, and congestive heart failure can explain transient proteinuria. Proteinuria only seen with upright posture is called orthostatic proteinuria and has a benign prognosis. Isolated proteinuria sustained over multiple clinic visits is found in many glomerular lesions. Proteinuria in most adults with glomerular disease is nonselective, containing albumin and a mixture of other serum proteins, whereas in children with minimal change disease, the proteinuria is selective and composed largely of albumin. Some patients with inflammatory glomerular disease, such as CLINICAL SYNDROMES acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis or MPGN, have pyuria Various forms of glomerular injury can also be parsed into sevcharacterized by the presence of considerable numbers of leuko-eral distinct syndromes on clinical grounds (Table 338-2). These cytes. This latter finding has to be distinguished from urine infected syndromes, however, are not always mutually exclusive. There is with bacteria.
It typically includes several measurement of physical, biochemical, and microscopic urine characteristics such as pH, specific gravity (indirect measurement of ion concentration), bilirubin, concentration of intermediate compounds derived from the fatty acid metabolism known as ketone bodies, hemoglobin, and con-centration of the proteins. Important part of this analysis in-cludes the determination of the amount of protein excreted in the urine. The excretion of excessive amounts of protein (i.e., proteinuria [albuminuria]) is an important  diagnostic sign of renal disease. Normally, less than 150 mg of protein is of protein almost always indicates renal disease, extreme exercise, such as jogging, or severe dehydration may pro-duce increased proteinuria in individuals without renal dis-ease. Microscopic examination of the urine may reveal presence of red and white blood cells, mineral crystals, and pathogenic agents such as bacteria or fungi. Often these elements are enclosed within the cylindrical structures called urinary casts. The matrix of urinary cast is formed by an 85kilodalton protein, uromodulin (Tamm-Horsfall protein) that precipitate in the lumen of distal convoluted tubes and collecting ducts during a disease process.  FOLDER 20.3 Clinical Correlation: Examination of the Urine—Urinalysis

Urinalysis is an important part of the examination of  patients excreted in the urine each day. Although excessive excretion

For years, cardiologists and nephrologists believed that chronic essential hypertension, the most common form of hypertension, was somehow related to an abnor-mality in the RAAS. However, 24-hour urine renin levels in such patients were usually normal. Not until a factor in the venom of a South American snake was shown to be a potent inhibitor of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the lung did investigators have both a clue to the cause of chronic essential hypertension and a new series of drugs with which to treat this common disease. The “lesion” in chronic essential hypertension is now be-lieved to be excessive production of angiotensin II in the lung. Development of the so-called ACE inhibitors—captopril, enalapril, and related derivatives of the original snake venom factor—has revolutionized the treatment of chronic essential hypertension. These antihypertensive drugs do not cause the often-dangerous side effects of the diuretics and -blockers that were previously the most commonly used drugs for control of this condition.  FOLDER 20.4 Clinical Correlation: Renin–Angiotensin– Aldosterone System (RAAS) and Hypertension Angiotensin II is also a potent vasoconstrictor that has a regulatory role in the control of renal and systemic vascu lar resistance.
61-2 Macroalbuminuria 300-3500 mg/d or 300-3500 mg/g Microalbuminuria 30-300 mg/d or 30-300 mg/g Nephrotic range > 3500 mg/d or > 3500 mg/g + Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts)Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts) Nephrotic syndrome Diabetes Amyloidosis Minimal change disease FSGS Membranous glomerulopathy IgA nephropathy

FIguRE 61-3 Approach to the patient with proteinuria. Investigation of proteinuria is often initiated by a positive dipstick on routine urinalysis. Conventional dipsticks detect predominantly albumin and provide a semiquantitative assessment (trace, 1+, 2+, or 3+), which is influenced by urinary concentration as reflected by urine specific gravity (minimum, <1.005; maximum, 1.030). However, more exact determination of proteinuria should employ a spot morning protein/creatinine ratio (mg/g) or a 24-h urine collection (mg/24 h). FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; RBC, red blood cell; UPEP, urine protein electrophoresis. Hypoalbuminemia in nephrotic syndrome occurs through excessive urinary losses and increased proximal tubule catabolism of filtered albumin. Edema forms from renal sodium retention and reduced plasma oncotic pressure, which favors fluid movement from capillaries to interstitium. To compensate for the perceived decrease in effective intravascular volume, activation of the renin-angiotensin system, stimulation of ADH, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system take place, promoting continued renal salt and water reabsorption and progressive edema. Despite these changes, hypertension is uncommon in primary kidney diseases resulting in the nephrotic syndrome (Fig. 61-3 and Chap. 338). The urinary loss of regulatory proteins and changes in hepatic synthesis contribute to the other manifestations of the nephrotic syndrome. A hypercoagulable state may arise from urinary losses of antithrombin III, reduced serum levels of proteins S and C, hyperfibrinogenemia, and enhanced platelet aggregation. Hypercholesterolemia may be severe and results from increased hepatic lipoprotein synthesis. Loss of immunoglobulins contributes to an increased risk of infection.
Other glomerular diseases can present with disruption of the basement membrane and slit diaphragms (e.g., by immune complex deposition), resulting in losses of albumin and other plasma proteins. The fusion of foot processes causes increased pressure across the capillary basement membrane, resulting in areas with larger pore sizes (and more severe “nonselective” proteinuria (Fig. 61-3). When the total daily urinary excretion of protein is >3.5 g, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema (nephrotic syndrome; Fig. 61-3) are often present as well. However, total daily urinary protein excretion >3.5 g can occur without the other features of the nephrotic syndrome in a variety of other renal diseases, including diabetes (Fig. 61-3). Plasma cell dyscrasias (multiple myeloma) can be associated with large amounts of excreted light chains in the urine, which may not be detected by dipstick. The light chains are filtered by the glomerulus and overwhelm the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule. Renal failure from these disorders occurs through a variety of mechanisms, including proximal tubule injury, tubule obstruction (cast nephropathy), and light chain deposition (Chap. 340). However, not all excreted light chains are nephrotoxic. PROTEINURIA ON URINE DIPSTICK Quantify by 24-h urinary excretion of protein and albumin or first morning spot albumin-to-creatinine ratio RBCs or RBC casts on urinalysis In addition to disorders listed under microalbuminuria consider Myeloma-associated kidney disease (check UPEP) Intermittent proteinuria Postural proteinuria Congestive heart failure Fever Exercise Go to Fig. 61-2 Macroalbuminuria 300-3500 mg/d or 300-3500 mg/g Microalbuminuria 30-300 mg/d or 30-300 mg/g Nephrotic range > 3500 mg/d or > 3500 mg/g + Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts)Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts) Nephrotic syndrome Diabetes Amyloidosis Minimal change disease FSGS Membranous glomerulopathy IgA nephropathy

FIguRE 61-3 Approach to the patient with proteinuria. Investigation of proteinuria is often initiated by a positive dipstick on routine urinalysis.
Characteristically, there is gross hematuria, the urine appearing smoky brown rather than bright red due to oxidation of hemoglobin to methemoglobin. Some degree of proteinuria is a constant feature, and, as mentioned earlier, it occasionally may be severe enough to produce the nephrotic syndrome. Serum complement levels are low during the active phase of the disease, and serum anti–streptolysin O antibody titers are elevated in poststreptococcal cases. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 14.9 Poststreptococcalglomerulonephritis.(A)Glomerularhypercellularityiscausedbyintracapillaryleukocytesandproliferationofintrinsicglomerularcells.Notetheredbloodcellcastsinthetubules. (B)Typicalelectron-densesubepithelial“hump”(arrow) andintramembranousdeposits.BM, Basementmembrane;CL, capillarylumen;E, endothelialcell;Ep, visceralepithelialcells(podocytes). Recovery occurs in most children with poststreptococcal disease, but some develop rapidly progressive GN owing to severe injury with formation of crescents, or chronic renal disease from secondary scarring. The prognosis in sporadic cases is less clear. In adults, 15% to 50% of affected individuals develop end-stage renal disease over a few years or 1 to 2 decades, depending on the clinical and histologic severity. By contrast, in children with sporadic cases of acute postinfectious GN, the progression to chronicity is much lower. IgA nephropathy is one of the most common causes of recurrent microscopic or gross hematuria and is the most common glomerular disease revealed by renal biopsy worldwide. This condition usually affects children and young adults and begins as an episode of gross hematuria that occurs within 1 or 2 days of a nonspecific upper-respiratory tract infection. Typically, the hematuria lasts several days and then subsides, but it recurs periodically, usually in the setting of a viral infection. It may be associated with local pain. The hallmark of the disease is the deposition of IgA in the mesangium.
B. Hairy leukoplakia. C. Aphthous ulcer. D. Kaposi’s sarcoma. (Fig. 226-34). These lesions are of unknown etiology and can be quite painful and interfere with swallowing. Topical anesthetics provide immediate symptomatic relief of short duration. The fact that thalidomide is an effective treatment for this condition suggests that the pathogenesis may involve the action of tissue-destructive cytokines. Palatal, glossal, or gingival ulcers may also result from cryptococcal disease or histoplasmosis. Esophagitis (Fig. 226-35) may present with odynophagia and retrosternal pain. Upper endoscopy is generally required to make an accurate diagnosis. Esophagitis may be due to Candida, CMV, or HSV. While CMV tends to be associated with a single large ulcer, HSV infection is more often associated with multiple small ulcers. The esophagus may also be the site of KS and lymphoma.
Etiologies include serum sickness (often induced by drugs such as penicillins, sulfas, salicylates, or barbiturates), connective-tissue disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus or Sjren’s syndrome), and infection (e.g., with hepatitis B virus, enteroviruses, or parasites). Malignancy, especially lymphoma, may be associated with fever and chronic urticaria (Chap. 72). In immunocompromised hosts, nodular lesions often represent disseminated infection. Patients with disseminated candidiasis (often due to Candida tropicalis) may have a triad of fever, myalgias, and eruptive nodules (Chap. 240). Disseminated cryptococcosis lesions (Chap. 239) may resemble molluscum contagiosum (Chap. 220e). Necrosis of nodules should raise the suspicion of aspergillosis (Chap. 241) or mucormycosis (Chap. 242). Erythema nodosum presents with exquisitely tender nodules on the lower extremities. Sweet syndrome (Chap. 72) should be considered in individuals with multiple nodules and plaques, often so edematous that they give the appearance of vesicles or bullae.
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Figure 25e-39 Disseminated Aspergillus infection. Multiple necrotic lesions developed in this neutropenic patient undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The lesion in the photograph is on the inner thigh and is several centimeters in diameter. Biopsy demonstrated infarction caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.) Figure 25e-41 Sweet syndrome is an erythematous indurated plaque with a pseudovesicular border. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.) Figure 25e-42 Fulminant meningococcemia with extensive angu-lar purpuric patches. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.) Figure 25e-43 Erythematous papular lesions are seen on the leg of this patient with chronic meningococcemia (arrow indicates a lesion). Figure 25e-45 Palpable purpuric papules on the lower leg are seen in this patient with cutaneous small-vessel hypersensitivity vasculitis. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.) CHAPTER 25e Atlas of Rashes Associated with Fever

Figure 25e-44 Disseminated gonococcemia in the skin is seen as hemorrhagic papules and pustules with purpuric centers in a centrifu-gal distribution. (Courtesy of Daniel M. Musher, MD; with permission.)
CHAPTER 25e Atlas of Rashes Associated with Fever

Figure 25e-44 Disseminated gonococcemia in the skin is seen as hemorrhagic papules and pustules with purpuric centers in a centrifu-gal distribution. (Courtesy of Daniel M. Musher, MD; with permission.) Figure 25e-46 The thumb of a patient with a necrotic ulcer of tula-remia. (Courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.) Figure 25e-47 This 50-year-old man developed high fever and massive inguinal lymphadenopathy after a small ulcer healed on his foot. Tularemia was diagnosed. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.) PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Figure 25e-48 This painful trypanosomal chancre developed at the site of a tsetse fly bite on the dorsum of the foot. Trypanosoma brucei was diagnosed from an aspirate of the ulcer. (Courtesy of Edward T. Ryan, MD. N Engl J Med 346:2069, 2002; with permission.) Figure 25e-49 Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms/drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DRESS/ DIHS). This patient developed a progressive eruption exhibiting early desquamation after taking phenobarbital. There was also associated lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly. (Courtesy of Peter Lio, MD; with permission.)
A patient with an abnormal liver function test as part of a routine examination 3. 4. Symptoms of HCC including cachexia, abdominal pain, or fever 1. Clinical jaundice, asthenia, itching (scratches), tremors, or disorientation 2. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, skin signs of liver failure 1. Blood tests: full blood count (splenomegaly), liver function tests, ammonia levels, electrolytes, AFP and DCP (PIVKA-2), Ca2+ and Mg2+; hepatitis B, C, and D serology (and quantitative HBV DNA or HCV RNA, if either is positive); neurotensin (specific for fibrolamellar HCC) 2. Triphasic dynamic helical (spiral) CT scan of liver (if inadequate, then follow with an MRI); chest CT scan; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy (for varices, bleeding, ulcers); and brain scan (only if symptoms suggest) 3. Core biopsy: of the tumor and separate biopsy of the underlying liver 1. HCC <2 cm: RFA, PEI, or resection 2. HCC >2 cm, no vascular invasion: liver resection, RFA, or OLTX 3. Multiple unilobar tumors or tumor with vascular invasion: TACE or sorafenib 4. Bilobar tumors, no vascular invasion: TACE with OLTX for patients with tumor response 5. Extrahepatic HCC or elevated bilirubin: sorafenib or bevacizumab plus erlotinib (combination agent trials are in progress)

This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC causative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly females.
Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2012;14(2):110-115. 125. Shiboski CH, Schmidt BL, Jordan RC. Tongue and tonsil car-cinoma: increasing trends in the U.S. population ages 20-44 years. Cancer. 2005;103(9):1843-1849. 126. Gillison ML, Shah KV. Chapter 9: role of mucosal human papillomavirus in nongenital cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2003;(31)(31):57-65. 127. Fakhry C, Westra WH, Li S, et al. Improved survival of patients with human papillomavirus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in a prospective clinical trial.
With changing sexual practices, oral HSV-2 is becoming increasingly common. Primary infections typically occur in children between 2 and 4 years of age and are often asymptomatic. However, in 10% to 20% of cases the primary infection manifests as acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, with abrupt onset of vesicles and ulcerations throughout the oral cavity. Most adults harbor latent HSV-1, and the virus can be reactivated, resulting in a so-called “cold sore” or recurrent herpetic stomatitis. Factors associated with HSV reactivation include trauma, allergies, exposure to ultraviolet light and extremes of temperature, upper-respiratory tract infections, pregnancy, menstruation, and immunosuppression. Recurrent lesions, which occur at the site of primary inoculation or in adjacent mucosa innervated by the same ganglion, typically appear as groups of small (1to 3-mm) vesicles. The lips (herpes labialis), nasal orifices, buccal mucosa, gingiva, and hard palate are the most common locations. Although lesions typically resolve within 7 to 10 days, they can persist in immunocompromised patients, who may require systemic anti-viral therapy. Morphologically, the lesions resemble those seen in esophageal herpes (see

Fig. 15.8 later in the chapter) and genital herpes (Chapter 19). The infected cells become ballooned and have large eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions. Adjacent cells commonly fuse to form large multinucleated polykaryons. Fig. 15.1 Aphthousulcer.Singleulcerationwithanerythematoushalosur-roundingayellowishfibrinopurulentmembrane. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Candidiasis is the most common fungal infection of the oral cavity.
Rates of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma have declined as well; however, this decline has not been as dramatic as the decline in rates of KS. In contrast, cART has had little effect on human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated malignancies. As patients with HIV infection live longer, a wider array of cancers is seen in this population. While some may only reflect known risk factors (e.g., smoking, alcohol consumption, co-infection with other viruses such as hepatitis B) that are increased in patients with HIV infection, some may be a direct consequence of HIV and are clearly increased in patients with lower CD4+ T cell counts. Kaposi’s sarcoma is a multicentric neoplasm consisting of multiple vascular nodules appearing in the skin, mucous membranes, and viscera. The course ranges from indolent, with only minor skin or lymph node involvement, to fulminant, with extensive cutaneous and visceral involvement. In the initial period of the AIDS epidemic, KS was a prominent clinical feature of the first cases of AIDS, occurring in 79% of the patients diagnosed in 1981. By 1989 it was seen in only 25% of cases, by 1992 the number had decreased to 9%, and by 1997 the number was <1%. HHV-8 (KSHV) has been strongly implicated as a viral cofactor in the pathogenesis of KS. Clinically, KS has varied presentations and may be seen at any stage of HIV infection, even in the presence of a normal CD4+ T cell

FIGuRE 226-41 Kaposi’s sarcoma in three patients with AIDS demonstrating (A) periorbital edema and bruising; (B) classic truncal distribu-tion of lesions; and (C) upper extremity lesions. count. The initial lesion may be a small, raised reddish-purple nodule on the skin (Fig. 226-41), a discoloration on the oral mucosa (Fig. 226-34D), or a swollen lymph node. Lesions often appear in sun-exposed areas, particularly the tip of the nose, and have a propensity to occur in areas of trauma (Koebner phenomenon).
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified. A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up. The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis. The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made (squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging procedure. Staging of any malignancy is important because it determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third esophageal tumor. The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to the liver. Bleeding was the cause of the anemia. Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably friable, and with the passage of digested material across the tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs.
He reports drinking about 6 beers per day. In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and an HIV test returns with a positive result. What drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmonary tubercu-losis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) would be likely to cause toxicity? Mycobacteria are intrinsically resistant to most antibiotics. Because they grow more slowly than other bacteria, antibiotics that are most active against rapidly growing cells are relatively ineffective. Mycobacterial cells can also be dormant and, thus, resistant to many drugs or killed only very slowly. The lipid-rich mycobacterial cell wall is impermeable to many agents. Mycobacterial species are intracellular pathogens, and organisms residing within macrophages are inaccessible to drugs that penetrate these cells poorly. Finally, mycobacteria are notorious for their ability to develop resistance. Combinations of two or more drugs are required to overcome these obstacles and to prevent emergence of resistance during the course of therapy. The response of mycobacterial infections to chemotherapy is slow, and treatment must be administered for months to years, depending on which drugs are used.
ACOG Committe Opin-ion. Reaffirmed 2017. Available at: https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/Management-of-Acute-Abnormal-Uterine-Bleeding-in-Nonpregnant-Reproductive-Aged-Women. Accessed August 11, 2018. 29. Van Bogaert LJ. Clinicopathologic findings in endometrial polyps. Obstet Gynecol. 1988;71:771-773. 30. Costa-Paiva L, Godoy CE, Jr, Antunes A, Jr, Caseiro JD, Arthuso M, Pinto-Neto AM. Risk of malignancy in endome-trial polyps in premenopausal and postmenopausal women according to clinicopathologic characteristics. Menopause. 2011;18:1278-1282. 31.
Metrorrhagia: Bleeding between periods. Menometrorrhagia: Excessive and irregular bleeding. Pelvic exam: Look for an enlarged uterus, a cervical mass, or polyps to assess for myomas, pregnancy, or cervical cancer. First step: Obtain a β-hCG to rule out ectopic pregnancy. Second step: Order a CBC to rule out anemia. Third step:

Pap smear to rule out cervical cancer (which can present with bleeding). TFTs to rule out hyper-/hypothyroidism and hyperprolactinemia. Obtain platelet count, bleeding time, and PT/PTT to rule out von Willebrand’s disease and factor XI def ciency. Order an ultrasound to evaluate the ovaries, uterus, and endometrium. Look for uterine masses, polycystic ovaries, and thickness of the endometrium. If the endometrium is ≥ 4 mm in a postmenopausal woman, obtain an endometrial biopsy. An endometrial biopsy should also be obtained if the patient is > 35 years of age, obese (BMI > 35), and diabetic. Heavy bleeding: Since heavy or prolonged uterine bleeding has likely denuded the endometrial cavity, estrogen is needed to rapidly promote endometrial growth. First step: For hemorrhage, high-dose estrogen IV stabilizes the endometrial lining and stops bleeding within one hour. Next step: If bleeding is not controlled within 12–24 hours, a D&C is indicated.
Thus, most recommend that pregnancy be avoided for 3 to 5 years after surgical resection. Interim contraception can include combination oral contraceptives, as they do not appear to have adverse cancer efects (Gandini, 2011). Related, subsequent pregnancies in women with localized melanoma do not lower cancer survival rates (Driscoll, 2009). Carcinomas of the colon and rectum are the third most frequent in women of all age groups in the United States (American Cancer Society, 2016). heir incidence in pregnancy is rising because of delayed childbearing (Rogers, 2016) . Even so, colorectal tumors are uncommon before age 40. Smith and colleagues (2003) reported an approximate incidence of 1 per 150,000 deliveries in the California Cancer Registry. he incidence approximated 1 per 35,000 births in a Danish Registry (Eibye, 2013). Most-80 percent-of colorectal carcinomas in pregnant women arise from the rectum. In one review, only 41 cases in pregnancy were colon cancers above the peritoneal reflection (Chan, 1999). he most frequent symptoms of colorectal cancer are abdominal pain, distention, nausea, constipation, and rectal bleeding. If symptoms of colon disease persist, digital rectal examination, stool tests for occult blood, and lexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy are done. Some malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract are discovered because of metastases to the ovary. Kruckenberg tumors are tumor-laden ovaries from another primary, often gastrointestinal, and have a bleak prognosis (GliSic, 2006; Kodama, 2016). Treatment of colon cancer in pregnant women mirrors the same general guidelines as for nonpregnant women.
Polyps are often difficult to identify with office endometrial biopsy or curettage. Hysteroscopy, transvaginal ultrasonography, or both may be useful adjuncts in identifying endometrial polyps. Unrecognized and untreated polyps may be a source of continued or recurrent bleeding, leading eventually to unnecessary hysterectomy. Table 35.3 Causes of Postmenopausal Uterine Bleeding

Estrogen therapy is an established risk factor for endometrial hyperplasia and cancer. The risk for endometrial cancer is fourto eighttimes greater in postmenopausal women receiving unopposed estrogen therapy, and the risk increases with time and higher estrogen doses. This risk can be decreased by the addition of a progestin to the estrogen, either cyclically or continuously. Endometrial biopsy should be performed as indicated to assess unscheduled bleeding or annually in women not taking a progestin. Endometrial hyperplasia occurs in 5% to 10% of patients with postmenopausal uterine bleeding. The sources of excess estrogen should be considered, including obesity, exogenous estrogen, or an estrogen-secreting ovarian tumor. Only about 10% of patients with postmenopausal bleeding have endometrial cancer. Premenopausal women with endometrial cancer invariably have abnormal uterine bleeding, which is often characterized as menometrorrhagia or oligomenorrhea, or cyclical bleeding that continues past the usual age of menopause. The diagnosis of endometrial cancer must be considered in premenopausal women if abnormal bleeding is persistent or recurrent or if obesity or chronic anovulation is present. Signs Physical examination seldom reveals any evidence of endometrial carcinoma, although obesity and hypertension are commonly associated constitutional factors. Special attention should be given to the more common sites of metastasis. Peripheral lymph nodes and breasts should be assessed carefully.
252. Savelli L, De Iaco P, Santini D, et al. Histopathologic features and risk factors for benignity, hyperplasia, and cancer in endometrial polyps. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:927–931. 253. Karlsson B, Granberg S, Wikland M, et al. Transvaginal ultrasonography of the endometrium in women with postmenopausal bleeding—a Nordic multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995; 172:1488–1494. 254. Epstein E, Valentin L. Managing women with post-menopausal bleeding. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2004;18:125–143. 255. Timmermans A, Opmeer BC, Khan KS, et al. Endometrial thickness measurement for detecting endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:160–167.
Provider costsnot charges-for this relatively simple physical facility, modest nursing care, no drugs other than iron and folate supplements, and few essential laboratory tests are minimal compared with the cost of neonatal intensive care for a preterm neonate. Importantly, none of these women have sufered thromboembolic disease. Many clinicians believe that further hospitalization is not warranted if hypertension abates within a few days, and this has legitimized third-party payers to deny hospitalization reimbursement. Consequently, many women with mild-tomoderate hypertension are managed at home. Outpatient management may continue as long as preeclampsia syndrome does not worsen and fetal jeopardy is not suspected. Sedentary activity throughout the greater part of the day is recommended. These women are instructed in detail to report symptoms. Home blood pressure and urine protein monitoring or frequent evaluations by a visiting nurse may prove beneficial. To assess this approach, 11r82 nulliparas with mild gestational hypertension-20 percent had proteinuria-were managed with home health care (Barton, 2002). Their mean gestational ages were 32 to 33 weeks at enrollment and 36 to 37 weeks at delivery. Severe preeclampsia developed in approximately 20 percent, about 3 percent developed HELLP syndrome, and two

Day Unit 24 57 23 36 0 39.8 1n.1 3320 0 Usual Care 30 54 21 36.5 21 39 5.1 3340 0 Turnbull (2004) 374b Hospitalization 125 63 0 35.9 22 39 S.5 3330 3.S 0 Day Unit 249 62 0 36.2 22 39.7 7.2 3300 2.3 0 aExciuded women with proteinuria at study entry. blncluded women with sl+ proteinuria. BW = birthweight; EGA = estimated gestational age; HTN = hypertension; Parao= nulliparas; PMR = perinatal mortality rate; Prot = proteinuria; SGA = small for gestational age. women had eclampsia. Perinatal outcomes were generally good.
Some women will have persistently worrisome hypertension despite usual therapy (Samuel, 2011; Sibai, 1990a). In these women, primary attention is given to the likelihood of pregnancy-aggravated hypertension, with or without superimposed preeclampsia. Other possibilities include inaccurate blood-pressure measurements, suboptimal treatment, and antagonizing substances such as chronic ingestion of nonsteroidal antiinlammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (Moser, 2006; Sowers, 2005). As discussed, the frequency of superimposed preeclampsia for women with chronic hypertension varies depending on the study population and hypertension severity (Ankumah, 2014). Importantly, in 40 to 50 percent of chronically hypertensive women, superimposed preeclampsia develops before 37 weeks (Chappell, 2008; Harper, 2016). This proportion is even higher in women who required hypertension treatment during pregnancy (Morgan, 20 16a). The diagnosis may be diicult to make, especially in women with hypertension who have underlying renal disease with chronic proteinuria (Cunningham, 1990; Morgan, 2016b). As discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 712), conditions that support the diagnosis of superimposed preeclampsia include worsening hypertension, new-onset proteinuria, neurological symptoms such as severe headaches and visual disturbances, generalized edema, oliguria, and certainly, convulsions or pulmonary edema. Making the diagnosis based on worsening proteinuria in women with baseline proteinuria is problematic. Supporting laboratory abnormalities are rising serum creatinine or hepatic transaminase levels, thrombocytopenia, or any of the facets of

HELLP (hemolysis, �levated liver enzyme levels, low 2latelet count) syndrome. For women with chronic hypertension and superimposed preeclampsia with severe features, magnesium sulfate for maternal neuroprophylaxis is recommended (Ameri can College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013). Severe hypertension is treated as described in Chapter 40 (p. 738). Some pregnant women with chronic hypertension have worsening hypertension with no other findings of superim posed preeclampsia. This is most commonly encountered near the end of the second trimester. In the absence of other supporting criteria for superimposed preeclampsia, this likely represents the higher end of the normal blood-pressure curve shown in Figure 50-1.
This is most commonly encountered near the end of the second trimester. In the absence of other supporting criteria for superimposed preeclampsia, this likely represents the higher end of the normal blood-pressure curve shown in Figure 50-1. In such women, if preeclampsia can be confidently excluded, it is reasonable to begin or to increase the dose of antihypertensive therapy. Women with well-controlled chronic hypertension who have no complicating factors can generally be expected to have a good pregnancy outcome. Because even those with mild hypertension have a greater risk of superimposed preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction, serial antepartum assessment of fetal well-being is recommended by many. That said, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2013), with the exception of sonographic fetal-growth monitoring, described in Chapter 44 (p. 852), no conclusive data address either benefit or harm associated with various antepartum surveillance strategies. • Expectant Management of Early-Onset

Given that many women with chronic hypertension develop superimposed preeclampsia before term, considerations for expectant management may be reasonable in some cases. In a study from Magee-Women's Hospital, 41 careully selected women with a median gestational age of 31.6 weeks were expectantly managed (Samuel, 2011). Despite liberal criteria to mandate delivery, 17 percent developed either placental abruption or pulmonary edema. The latency period was extended by a mean of 9.7 days. There were no perinatal deaths, however, salutary outcomes were similar. These investigators recommend randomized trials to study expectant management before this becomes usual care. For chronically hypertensive women who have complications such as fetal-growth restriction or superimposed preeclampsia, the decision to deliver is made by clinical judgment. The route of delivery is dictated by obstetrical factors. Certainly, most women with superimposed severe preeclampsia are better delivered even when the fetus is markedly preterm.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
Am ] Obstet Gynecol 179:925,t1998

Drazner MH, Dries DJ, Peshock RM, et al: Left ventricular hypertrophy is more prevalent in blacks than whites in the general population. he Dallas Heart Study. Hypertension 45:124, 2005

Drukker L, Hants Y, Sharon E, et al: Perimortem cesarean section for maternal and fetal salvage: concise review and protocol. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(10):965,t2014

Duarte AG: ARDS in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):862, 2014

Edwards SE, Grobman WA, Lappen ]R, et al: Modified obstetric early warning scoring systems (MOEWS): validating the diagnostic performance for severe sepsis in women with chorioamnionitis. Amt] Obstet Gynecol 212(4):536. e1, 2015

Einarson A, Bailey B, Inocencion G, et al: Accidental electric shock in pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. Amt] Obstet Gynecol 176:678, 1997

El Kady D, Gilbert WM, ing G, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of assaults during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecolt105:357, 2005

Ellingsen CL, Eggebo TM, Lexow K: Amniotic fluid embolism after blunt abdominal trauma. Resuscitation 75(1):180, 2007

Eschenbach DA: Treating spontaneous and induced septic abortions. Obstet

Gynecol 125(5):1042,t2015 Fatovich DM: Electric shock in pregnancy. ] Emerg Med 11: 175, 1993 Ferguson ND, Cook D], Guyatt GH, et al: High-frequency oscillation in early acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl] Med 368(9):795, 2013

Filbin MR, Ring DC, Wessels MR, et al: Case 2-2009: a 25-year-old man with pain and swelling of the right hand and hypotension. N Engl ] Med 360:281, 2009

Gafney A: Critical care in pregnancy-is it diferent? Semin Perinatol 38(6):329,t2014

Gallup DG, Freedman MA, Meguiar RV, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in gynecologic and obstetric patients: a surgical emergency. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 187:305,t2002

Gandhi S, Sun 0, Park L, et al: he Pulmonary Edema Preeclampsia Evaluation (PEPE) Study.t] Obstet GynaecoIt36(l2):1065, 2014

Gandhi SK, Powers ]e, Nomeir M, et al: he pathogenesis of acute pulmonary edema associated with hypertension.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
TQ5. What response to the DKA is apparent in MW? What response is likely occurring in the kidney? Hint: In addition to conversion to urea, how is toxic ammonia removed from the body? TQ6. What would be true about the levels of ketone bodies and glucose during periods of physiologic stress in individuals with impaired FA oxidation? Case 4: Hypoglycemia, Hyperketonemia, and Liver Dysfunction

Patient Presentation: AK, a 59-year-old male with slurred speech, ataxia (loss of skeletal muscle coordination), and abdominal pain, was dropped off at the Emergency Department (ED). Focused History: AK is known to the ED staff from previous visits. He has a 6year history of chronic, excessive alcohol consumption. He is not known to take illicit drugs. At this ED visit, AK reports that he has been drinking heavily in the past day or so. He cannot recall having eaten anything in that time. There is evidence of recent vomiting, but no blood is apparent. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): The physical examination was remarkable for AK’s emaciated appearance. (His body mass index was later determined to be 17.5, which put him in the underweight category.)
Why is urinary urobilinogen increased relative to normal in hemolytic jaundice and absent in obstructive jaundice? Case 7: Joint Pain

Patient Presentation: IR is a 22-year-old male who presents for follow-up 10 days after having been treated in the Emergency Department (ED) for severe inflammation at the base of his thumb. Focused History: This was IR’s first occurrence of severe joint pain. In the ED, he was given an anti-inflammatory medication. Fluid aspirated from the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb was negative for organisms but positive for needle-shaped monosodium urate (MSU) crystals (see image at right). The inflammatory symptoms have since resolved. IR reports he is in good health otherwise, with no significant past medical history. His body mass index (BMI) is 31. No tophi (deposits of MSU crystals under the skin) were detected in the physical examination. Pertinent Findings: Results on a 24-hour urine specimen and blood tests requested in advance of this visit reveal that IR is not an undersecretor of uric acid. His blood urate was 8.5 mg/dl (reference = 2.5–8.0). The unusually young age of presentation is suggestive of an enzymopathy of purine metabolism, and additional blood tests are ordered. Diagnosis: IR has gout (MSU crystal deposition disease), a type of inflammatory arthritis. Treatment: IR was given prescriptions for allopurinol and colchicine. The treatment goals are to reduce his blood urate levels to <6.0 mg/dl and prevent additional attacks.
A patient with an abnormal liver function test as part of a routine examination 3. 4. Symptoms of HCC including cachexia, abdominal pain, or fever 1. Clinical jaundice, asthenia, itching (scratches), tremors, or disorientation 2. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, skin signs of liver failure 1. Blood tests: full blood count (splenomegaly), liver function tests, ammonia levels, electrolytes, AFP and DCP (PIVKA-2), Ca2+ and Mg2+; hepatitis B, C, and D serology (and quantitative HBV DNA or HCV RNA, if either is positive); neurotensin (specific for fibrolamellar HCC) 2. Triphasic dynamic helical (spiral) CT scan of liver (if inadequate, then follow with an MRI); chest CT scan; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy (for varices, bleeding, ulcers); and brain scan (only if symptoms suggest) 3. Core biopsy: of the tumor and separate biopsy of the underlying liver 1. HCC <2 cm: RFA, PEI, or resection 2. HCC >2 cm, no vascular invasion: liver resection, RFA, or OLTX 3. Multiple unilobar tumors or tumor with vascular invasion: TACE or sorafenib 4. Bilobar tumors, no vascular invasion: TACE with OLTX for patients with tumor response 5. Extrahepatic HCC or elevated bilirubin: sorafenib or bevacizumab plus erlotinib (combination agent trials are in progress)

This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC causative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly females.
Hallucinations are often caused by a cannabis overdose, especially when hashish is ingested. The slower kinetics of oral cannabis are more dif-ficult to control compared to smoking marijuana. The poor learning performance may be due to the interference of exogenous cannabis with endocannabinoids that fine-tune synaptic transmission and plasticity. While probably not fulfilling the criteria for addiction at present, the patient is at risk as epidemiologic studies show that drug abuse typically begins in late adolescence. The fact that he is not yet using other drugs is a positive sign. SECTION VI DRUGS USED TO TREAT DISEASES OF THE BLOOD, INFLAMMATION, & GOUT

James L. Zehnder, MD*

A 25-year-old woman who has been on a strict vegan diet for the past 2 years presents with increasing numbness and paresthesias in her extremities, generalized weakness, a sore tongue, and gastrointestinal discomfort. Physical examina-tion reveals a pale woman with diminished vibration sen-sation, diminished spinal reflexes, and extensor plantar reflexes (Babinski sign). Examination of her oral cavity reveals atrophic glossitis, in which the tongue appears deep red in color and abnormally smooth and shiny due to atro-phy of the lingual papillae. Laboratory testing reveals a mac-rocytic anemia based on a hematocrit of 30% (normal for women, 37–48%), a hemoglobin concentration of 9.4 g/dL, an erythrocyte mean cell volume (MCV) of 123 fL (nor-mal, 84–99 fL), an erythrocyte mean cell hemoglobin con-centration (MCHC) of 34% (normal, 31–36%), and a low reticulocyte count. Further laboratory testing reveals a normal serum folate concentration and a serum vitamin B12 (cobalamin) concentration of 98 pg/mL (normal, 250–1100 pg/mL). Once megaloblastic anemia was identified, why was it important to measure serum concentrations of both folic acid and cobalamin? Should this patient be treated with oral or parenteral vitamin B12? Hematopoiesis, the production from undifferentiated stem cells of circulating erythrocytes, platelets, and leukocytes, is a remarkable process that produces more than 200 billion new * The author acknowledges contributions of the previous author of this chapter, Susan B. Masters, PhD. blood cells per day in the normal person and even greater numbers of cells in persons with conditions that cause loss or destruction of blood cells.
As part of her differential diagnosis, the resident considered the possibility that the man had testicular cancer with regional abdominal para-aortic nodal involvement (the lateral aortic, or lumbar, nodes). A primary testicular neoplasm is the most common tumor in men between the ages of 25 and 34 and accounts for between 1% and 2% of all malignancies in men. A family history of testicular cancer and maldescent of the testis are strong predisposing factors. Spread of the tumor is typically to the lymph node chains that drain the testes. The testes develop from structures adjacent to the renal vessels in the upper abdomen, between the transversalis fascia and the peritoneum. They normally migrate through the inguinal canals into the scrotum just before birth. The testes take with them their arterial supply, their venous drainage, their nerve supply, and their lymphatics. A computed tomography scan revealed a para-aortic lymph node mass in the upper abdomen and enlarged lymph nodes throughout the internal and common iliac lymph node chains. Assuming the scrotal mass was a carcinoma of the testes, which would normally drain into the lateral aortic (lumbar) nodes in the upper abdomen, it would be very unusual for iliac lymphadenopathy to be present. Further examination of the scrotal mass was required. A transillumination test of the scrotum on the affected side was positive. An ultrasound scan revealed normal right and left testes and a large fluid collection around the right testis. A diagnosis of a right-sided hydrocele was made. Scrotal masses are common in young males, and determining the exact anatomical site of the scrotal mass is of utmost clinical importance. Any mass that arises from the testis should be investigated to exclude testicular cancer.
If a testicular mass is detected, a radical inguinal orchiectomy should be performed. Because the testis develops from the gonadal ridge, its blood supply and lymphatic drainage originate in the abdomen and descend with the testis into the scrotum. An inguinal approach is taken to avoid breaching anatomic barriers and permitting additional pathways of spread. Back pain from retroperitoneal metastases is common and must be distinguished from musculoskeletal pain. Dyspnea from pulmonary metastases occurs infrequently. Patients with increased serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) may present with gynecomastia. A delay in diagnosis is associated with a more advanced stage and possibly worse survival. The staging evaluation for GCT includes a determination of serum levels of α fetoprotein (AFP), hCG, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). After orchiectomy, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is generally performed. Stage I disease is limited to the testis, epididymis, or spermatic cord. Stage II disease is limited to retroperitoneal (regional) lymph nodes. Stage III disease is disease outside the retroperitoneum, involving supradiaphragmatic nodal sites or viscera. The staging may be “clinical”—defined solely by physical examination, blood marker evaluation, and radiographs—or “pathologic”—defined by an operative procedure. The regional draining lymph nodes for the testis are in the retro-peritoneum, and the vascular supply originates from the great vessels (for the right testis) or the renal vessels (for the left testis). As a result, the lymph nodes that are involved first by a right testicular tumor are the interaortocaval lymph nodes just below the renal vessels.
Partial orchiec-tomy through an inguinal approach may be considered in some cases, including a suspected diagnosis of lymphoma. Chest and abdominal axial imaging are the main staging tools. Testicular cancer has a very predictable pattern of spread. Right testicular cancer tends to metastasize to the interaortocaval lymph node, followed by paracaval and paraaortic lymph nodes. Left-sided testicular cancer rarely crosses to the paracaval lymph nodes.107 Clinical TNM staging includes local stage, distant metastasis, and tumor markers.Depending on the stage and histology of the primary tumor, multiple treatment options are available. These include active surveillance, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND), and adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Active surveillance for localized disease follows a tight sched-ule of physical exams, tumor markers and imaging studies. The cancer recurs in 20% to 30% of patients on active surveillance. The presence of embryonal carcinoma and vascular invasion seem to be interrelated predictors of recurrence.108 Recurrence usually occurs within the first 2 years and in the retroperito-neum.109 Pure seminoma is radiosensitive; stages I, IIa, and IIb disease can be treated with external-beam radiation to the retro-peritoneal nodes. Alternatively, a single dose of carboplatin for stage I seminoma was found to be just as effective as radiation therapy.110 More advanced seminoma is treated with platinum-based systemic chemotherapy.Stages I to IIA nonseminomatous testis cancer is poten-tially cured with RPLND or chemotherapy.111 Persistently high tumor markers after radical orchiectomy or high-stage meta-static germ cell tumors warrant systemic chemotherapy. Due to the high rates of teratoma or viable germ cell tumor, postchemo-therapy bulky masses are resected by RPLND or other surgi-cal procedures. The overall survival rate of localized disease is outstanding (99% at 5 years). Patients with more advanced distant metastatic disease (stage III) have 75% survival rates. The overall prognosis is generally better for seminomatous than nonseminomatous germ cell tumors.112Surgical Considerations. Radical orchiectomy is done through an inguinal incision extending from the external inguinal ring to the internal inguinal ring.
Metastases to the testis (usually lymphoma in older men) are rare. In 2018 there were 9310 new cases and 400 deaths from the disease.91 The incidence of testis cancer varies around the world.103 It contains a heterogeneous group of tumors, of which 95% are germ cell tumors; the rest originate from stromal cells (Leydig or Sertoli cells). Germ cell tumors can be classified as either seminomatous or nonseminomatous. Seminoma constitutes more than 50% of all testis cancer. The Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177101/03/19   6:35 PM 1772SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 40-8. Scrotal ultrasound of the right testis. A heteroge-neous echoic mass is seen.incidence of bilateral GCT is approximately 2.5%.104,105 There are four established risk factors for testis cancer: cryptorchidism, family history of testis cancer, a personal history of testis can-cer, and intratubular germ cell neoplasia. Most patients present with testicular pain or a testicular mass. Respiratory symptoms, back pain, weight loss, or gynecomastia may indicate metastatic disease (10–20%). A testicular mass is considered malignant till proven otherwise. Similarly, retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy in young men should be considered metastatic testicular cancer.Standard initial workup includes scrotal ultrasound (Fig. 40-8) and serum tumor markers (α-fetoprotein, quanti-tative human chorionic gonadotropin, and lactate dehydroge-nase). Most consider percutaneous biopsy contraindicated due to the rare but historical risk of disturbing the natural lymphatic drainage to the retroperitoneum and possible seeding of the scrotum.106 Radical inguinal orchiectomy is the gold standard treatment for excision of the primary tumor. Partial orchiec-tomy through an inguinal approach may be considered in some cases, including a suspected diagnosis of lymphoma. Chest and abdominal axial imaging are the main staging tools.
Malignant germ cell tumors usually contain frankly neoplastic tissues of germ cell origin (i.e., yolk sac carcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, germinoma, or choriocarcinoma). Yolk sac carci-nomas produce α-fetoprotein (AFP), while choriocarcinomas produce β-human chorionic gonadotropin (BHCG) resulting in elevation of these substances in the serum, which can serve as tumor markers. In addition, germinomas can also produce elevation of serum BHCG but not to the levels associated with choriocarcinoma.Table 39-4Staging of RhabdomyosarcomaSTAGESITESTSIZENM1Orbit, nonparameningeal head and neck, genitourinary  (other than kidney, bladder, and prostate), and biliaryT1 or T2a or bAny NM02Bladder/prostate, extremity, cranial parameningeal, otherT1 or T2a N0 or NXM03Bladder/prostate, extremity, cranial parameningeal, otherT1 or T2aN1M0   bAny NM04AllT1 or T2a or bAny NM1T1 = tumor confined to anatomic site of origin; T2 = tumor extension and/or fixed to surrounding tissues; a = ≤5 cm; b = >5 cm; N0 = regional nodes not clinically involved; N1 = regional nodes clinically involved; NX = regional node status unknown; M0 = no distant metastasis; M1 = metastasis present.Clinical group:Group 1: Localized disease, completely resected, no regional lymph node involvement.Group 2: Localized disease, gross total resection but microscopic residual disease; or regional lymph nodes involved.Group 3: Localized disease with gross residual disease after incomplete resection or biopsy only.Group 4: Metastatic disease at diagnosis.Figure 39-39. Sacrococcygeal teratoma in a 2-day-old boy.Sacrococcygeal Teratoma. Sacrococcygeal teratoma usually presents as a large mass extending from the sacrum in the new-born period. Diagnosis may be established by prenatal US. In fetuses with evidence of hydrops and a large sacrococcygeal teratoma, prognosis is poor; thus, prenatal intervention has been advocated in such patients. The mass may be as small as a few centimeters in diameter or as massive as the size of the infant (Fig. 39-39). The tumor has been classified based upon the location and degree of intrapelvic extension. Lesions that grow predominantly into the presacral space often present later in childhood. The differential diagnosis consists of neural tumors, lipoma, and myelomeningoceles.Most tumors are identified at birth and are benign. Malig-nant yolk sac tumor histology occurs in a minority of these tumors. Complete resection of the tumor as early as possible is essential. The rectum and genital structures are often distorted by the tumor but usually can be preserved in the course of resection.
Clinical manifestations by age group are as follows:

Infants: Erythematous, weeping, pruritic patches on the face, scalp, and diaper area. Children: Dry, scaly, pruritic, excoriated patches in the ﬂ exural areas and neck. Adults: Lichenification and dry, fissured skin, often limited to the hands. FIGURE 2.2-2. Atopic dermatitis. Erythema toxicum of the newborn resembles eczema, presenting with red papules/ vesicles with surrounding erythema. ↑ eosinophils will be seen on biopsy. This typically benign rash rarely appears after f ve days of age and is usually gone in 7–14 days; treatment is typically observation. Hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and scaling are seen in the antecubital fossae. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD, as published in Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, et al. Harrison’s

Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.) Diagnosis is made clinically. Patients may have mild eosinophilia and ↑ IgE. Rule out seborrheic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, pityriasis rosea, drug eruption, and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Classic physical findings include pale pink or bluish gray, swollen, boggy nasal turbinates with clear, watery secretions. Frequent nasal itching and rubbing of the nose with the palm of the hand, the allergic salute, can lead to a transverse nasal crease found across the lower bridge of the nose. Children may produce clucking sounds by rubbing the soft palate with their tongue. Oropharyngeal examination may reveal lymphoid hyperplasia of the soft palate and posterior pharynx or visible mucus or both. Orthodontic abnormalities may be seen in children with chronic mouth breathing. Allergic shiners, dark periorbital swollen areas caused by venous congestion, along with swollen eyelids or conjunctival injection, are often present in children. Retracted tympanic membranes from eustachian tube dysfunction or serous otitis media also may be present. Other atopic diseases, such as asthma or eczema, may be present, which helps lead the clinician to the correct diagnosis. Allergy testing can be performed by in vivo skin tests or by in vitro serum tests (radioallergosorbent test [RAST], fluorescent enzyme immunoassay [FEIA], or enzyme linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) to pertinent allergens found in the patient’s environment (see Table 77-4). Skin tests (prick/puncture) provide immediate and accurate results. Positive tests correlate strongly with nasal and bronchial allergen provocative challenges. In vitro serum tests are useful for patients with abnormal skin conditions, for those with a tendency for anaphylaxis, or for those taking medications that interfere with skin testing. Disadvantages of serum tests include increased cost, inability to obtain immediate results, and reduced sensitivity compared with skin tests. Widespread screening with serum testing without regard to symptoms is not recommended. Measurement of total serum IgE or blood eosinophils generally is not helpful.
Erythema toxicum is an erythematous, papular-vesicular rash common in neonates that develops after birth and involves eosinophils in the vesicular fluid. Pustular melanosis, more common in African American infants, may be seen at birth and consists of a small, dry vesicle on a pigmented brown macular base. Erythema toxicum and pustular melanosis are benign lesions but may mimic more serious conditions, such as the vesicular rash of disseminated herpes simplex or the bullous eruption of S. aureus impetigo. Tzanck smear, Gram stain, Wright stain, direct fluorescent antibody stain, polymerase chain reaction for herpes DNA, and appropriate cultures may be needed to distinguish these rashes. Other common characteristic rashes are milia (yellow-white epidermal cysts of the pilosebaceous follicles that are noted on the nose) and miliaria (prickly heat), which is caused by obstructed sweat glands. Edema maybe present in preterm infants, but also suggests hydrops fetalis, sepsis, hypoalbuminemia, or lymphatic disorders. Figure 58-5 Maturity rating as calculated by adding the physical and neurologic scores, calculating the gestational age. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al: New Ballard Score, expanded to include extremely premature infants, J Pediatr 119:417-423, 1991.). The skull may be elongated and molded after a prolonged labor; this resolves 2 to 3 days after birth. The sutures should be palpated to determine the width and the presence of premature fusion or cranial synostosis. The anterior and posterior 4.5 3.5 2.5 1.5 0.5 0 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41

Figure 58-6 Birth weight–specific and estimated gestational age–specific mortality rates. The dashed lines of the figure represent the 10th and 90th percentile weights. The grid lines are plotted by each gestational age and in 250-g weight increments. Each number in the box is the percent mortality rate for the grid defined by gestational age and birth weight range. (From Thomas P, Peabody J, Turnier V, et al: A new look at intrauterine growth and impact of race, attitude, and gender, Pediatrics 106:E21, 2000.)
However, the distinctive appearance of an eruption in concert with a clinical syndrome can facilitate a prompt diagnosis and the institution of life-saving therapy or critical infection-control interventions. Representative images of many of the rashes discussed in this chapter are included in Chap. 25e. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

A thorough history of patients with fever and rash includes the following relevant information: immune status, medications taken within the previous month, specific travel history, immunization status, exposure to domestic pets and other animals, history of animal (including arthropod) bites, recent dietary exposures, existence of cardiac abnormalities, presence of prosthetic material, recent exposure to ill individuals, and exposure to sexually transmitted diseases. The history should also include the site of onset of the rash and its direction and rate of spread. A thorough physical examination entails close attention to the rash, with an assessment and precise definition of its salient features. First, it is critical to determine what type of lesions make up the eruption. Macules are flat lesions defined by an area of changed color (i.e., a blanchable erythema). Papules are raised, solid lesions <5 mm in diameter; plaques are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a flat, plateau-like surface; and nodules are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a more rounded configuration. Wheals (urticaria, hives) are papules or plaques that are pale pink and may appear annular (ringlike) as they enlarge; classic (nonvasculitic) wheals are transient, lasting only 24 h in any defined area. Vesicles (<5 mm) and bullae (>5 mm) are circumscribed, elevated lesions containing fluid. Pustules are raised lesions containing purulent exudate; vesicular processes such as varicella or herpes simplex may evolve to pustules. Nonpalpable purpura is a flat lesion that is due to bleeding into the skin. If <3 mm in diameter, the purpuric lesions are termed petechiae; if >3 mm, they are termed ecchymoses. Palpable purpura is a raised lesion that is due to inflammation of the vessel wall (vasculitis) with subsequent hemorrhage.
55-2). Most episodes of acute diarrhea are mild and self-limited and do not justify the cost and potential morbidity rate of diagnostic or pharmacologic interventions. Indications for evaluation include profuse diarrhea with dehydration, grossly bloody stools, fever ≥38.5°C (≥101°F), duration >48 h without improvement, recent antibiotic use, new community outbreaks, associated severe abdominal pain in patients >50 years, and elderly (≥70 years) or immunocompromised patients. In some cases of moderately severe febrile diarrhea associated with fecal leukocytes (or increased fecal levels of the leukocyte proteins, such as calprotectin) or with gross blood, a diagnostic evaluation might be avoided in favor of an empirical antibiotic trial (see below). The cornerstone of diagnosis in those suspected of severe acute infectious diarrhea is microbiologic analysis of the stool. Workup includes cultures for bacterial and viral pathogens, direct inspection for ova and parasites, and immunoassays for certain bacterial toxins (C. difficile), viral antigens (rotavirus), and protozoal antigens (Giardia, E. histolytica). The aforementioned clinical and epidemiologic associations may assist in focusing the evaluation. If a particular pathogen or set of possible pathogens is so implicated, then either the whole panel of routine studies may not be necessary or, in some instances, special cultures may be appropriate as for enterohemorrhagic and other types of E. coli, Vibrio species, and Yersinia. Molecular diagnosis of pathogens in stool can be made by identification of unique DNA sequences; and evolving microarray technologies have led to more rapid, sensitive, specific, and cost-effective diagnosis. CHAPTER 55 Diarrhea and Constipation History and  physical exam Moderate  (activities altered) Mild  (unrestricted) Observe Resolves Persists* Severe  (incapacitated) Institute fluid and electrolyte replacement Antidiarrheal agents Resolves Persists* Stool microbiology studies Pathogen found Fever ˜38.5°C, bloody stools, fecal WBCs, immunocompromised or elderly host Evaluate and treat accordingly Acute Diarrhea Likely noninfectious Likely infectious Yes†No Yes†No Select specific treatment Empirical treatment + further evaluation FIguRE 55-2 Algorithm for the management of acute diarrhea. Consider empirical treatment before evaluation with (*) metronida-zole and with (†) quinolone. WBCs, white blood cells. Persistent diarrhea is commonly due to Giardia (Chap. 247), but additional causative organisms that should be considered include

C. difficile (especially if antibiotics had been administered), E. histolytica, Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter, and others. If stool studies are unrevealing, flexible sigmoidoscopy with biopsies and upper endoscopy with duodenal aspirates and biopsies may be indicated.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Fever often implies invasive disease, although fever and diarrhea may also result from infection outside the gastrointestinal tract, as in malaria. 3. Stools that contain blood or mucus indicate ulceration of the large bowel. Bloody stools without fecal leukocytes should alert the laboratory to the possibility of infection with Shiga toxin–producing enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli. Bulky white stools suggest a small-intestinal process that is causing malabsorption. Profuse “rice-water” stools suggest cholera or a similar toxigenic process. 4. Frequent stools over a given period can provide the first warning of impending dehydration. 5. Abdominal pain may be most severe in inflammatory processes like those due to Shigella, Campylobacter, and necrotizing toxins. Painful abdominal muscle cramps, caused by electrolyte loss, can develop in severe cases of cholera. Bloating is common in giardiasis. An appendicitis-like syndrome should prompt a culture for Yersinia enterocolitica with cold enrichment. 6. Tenesmus (painful rectal spasms with a strong urge to defecate but little passage of stool) may be a feature of cases with proctitis, as in shigellosis or amebiasis.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
6. Tenesmus (painful rectal spasms with a strong urge to defecate but little passage of stool) may be a feature of cases with proctitis, as in shigellosis or amebiasis. 7. Vomiting implies an acute infection (e.g., a toxin-mediated illness or food poisoning) but can also be prominent in a variety of systemic illnesses (e.g., malaria) and in intestinal obstruction. 8. Asking patients whether anyone else they know is sick is a more efficient means of identifying a common source than is constructing a list of recently eaten foods. If a common source seems likely, specific foods can be investigated. See text for a discussion of bacterial food poisoning. 9. Current antibiotic therapy or a recent history of treatment suggests Clostridium difficile diarrhea (Chap. 161). Stop antibiotic treatment if possible and consider tests for C. difficile toxins. Antibiotic use may increase the risk of chronic intestinal carriage following salmonellosis. 10. See text (and Chap.
When a vibrating fork, preferably of 512-Hz frequency, is held about 2.5 cm from the ear (test for air conduction), sound waves can be appreciated only as they are transmitted through the middle ear; they will be reduced with disease in this location. When the vibrating fork is applied to the skull (test for bone conduction), the sound waves are conveyed directly to the cochlea, without intervention of the sound-transmission apparatus of the middle ear, and will therefore not be reduced or lost in outer or middle ear disease. Normally air conduction is better than bone conduction, and the sound transmitted though the air is appreciated for about twice as long as that passing through the bone. These principles form the basis for several simple tests of auditory function. In the Weber test, the vibrating fork is applied to the forehead in the midline (or to a central incisor). A normal person hears the bone-conducted sound equally in both ears. In nerve deafness, the sound is localized to the normal ear for the reasons noted previously; in conductive deafness, the sound is perceived as louder in the affected ear because interference from ambient sounds is muted on the affected side. In the Rinne test, the fork is applied to the mastoid process. At the moment the patient indicates that the sound ceases, the fork is held at the auditory meatus. In middle ear deafness, the sound cannot be heard by air conduction after bone conduction has ceased (abnormal Rinne test). In nerve deafness, the reverse may be true (normal Rinne test), but more saliently, both air and bone conduction are quantitatively decreased. The Schwabach test consists of comparing the patient’s bone conduction with that of the normal examiner. In general, early sensorineural deafness is characterized by a partial loss of perception of high-pitched sounds and conductive deafness by a partial loss of low-pitched sounds. This can be ascertained by the use of tuning forks of different frequencies but most accurately by the use of an audiometer and the construction of an audiogram, which reveals the entire range of hearing at a glance. The audiogram is an essential test in the evaluation of hearing loss and the point of departure for subsequent diagnostic evaluation.
Unilateral serous effusion should prompt a fiberoptic examination of the nasopharynx to exclude neoplasms. Cranial nerves should be evaluated with special attention to facial and trigeminal nerves, which are commonly affected with tumors involving the cerebellopontine angle. Thyroid hormone–binding protein Cytoskeletal protein Potassium channel Gap junction Gap junction Gap junction Class II nonmuscle myosin Cell adhesion molecule Unknown Transmembrane protein Tectorial membrane protein Unknown Developmental gene Cytoskeletal protein Cytoskeletal protein Transcription factor Cytoskeletal protein Cytoskeletal protein Unconventional myosin Developmental gene Vesicular glutamate transporter Transcription factor Transmembrane protein Purinergic receptor Effector of epidermal growth factor–

Gap junction Gap junction Cytoskeletal protein Cytoskeletal protein Chloride/iodide transporter Transmembrane protein Transmembrane protein Trafficking of membrane vesicles Transmembrane serine protease

The Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests, with a 512-Hz tuning fork, are used to screen for hearing loss, differentiate conductive from sensorineural hearing losses, and confirm the findings of audiologic evaluation. The Rinne test compares the ability to hear by air conduction with the ability to hear by bone conduction. The tines of a vibrating tuning fork are held near the opening of the external auditory canal, and then the stem is placed on the mastoid process; for direct contact, it may be placed on teeth or dentures. The patient is asked to indicate whether the tone is louder by air conduction or bone conduction. Normally, and in the presence of sensorineural hearing loss, a tone is heard louder by air conduction than by bone conduction; however, with conductive hearing loss of ≥30 dB (see “Audiologic Assessment,” below), the bone-conduction stimulus is perceived as louder than the air-conduction stimulus. For the Weber test, the stem of a vibrating tuning fork is placed on

Unknown Tectorial membrane protein Gel attachment to nonsensory cell Morphogenesis and cohesion Cytoskeletal protein Reversible S-glutathionylation of

CHAPTER 43 Disorders of Hearing the head in the midline and the patient is asked whether the tone is heard in both ears or better in one ear than in the other. With a unilateral conductive hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the affected ear. With a unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the unaffected ear. A 5-dB difference in hearing between the two ears is required for lateralization. LABORATORY ASSESSMENT OF HEARINg Audiologic Assessment The minimum audiologic assessment for hearing loss should include the measurement of pure tone air-conduction and bone-conduction thresholds, speech reception threshold, word recognition score, tympanometry, acoustic reflexes, and acoustic-reflex decay. This test battery provides a screening evaluation of the entire auditory system and allows one to determine whether further

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Abbreviations: BOR, branchio-oto-renal syndrome; WS, Waardenburg’s syndrome. differentiation of a sensory (cochlear) from a neural (retrocochlear) hearing loss is indicated. Pure tone audiometry assesses hearing acuity for pure tones.
Weber test Tuning fork on vertex of skull Rinne test Tuning fork in front of ear (air conduction, AC), Tuning fork on mastoid process (bone conduction, BC) No localization BC > AC Localizes to una˜ected ear ˜ transmission of all sound AC > BCAC > BC Localizes to a˜ected ear ˜ transmission of background noise

Types of hearing loss

Cholesteatoma Overgrowth of desquamated keratin debris within the middle ear space  ( A , arrows); may erode ossicles, mastoid air cells  conductive hearing  loss. Often presents with painless otorrhea. Conjunctivitis Inflammation of the conjunctiva  red eye A . Allergic—itchy eyes, bilateral. Bacterial—pus; treat with antibiotics. Viral—most common, often adenovirus; sparse mucous discharge, swollen preauricular node, • lacrimation; self-resolving. Cataract Painless, often bilateral, opacification of lens A , often resulting in glare and  vision, especially at night. Acquired risk factors:  age, smoking, excessive alcohol use, excessive sunlight, prolonged corticosteroid use, diabetes mellitus, trauma, infection. Congenital risk factors: classic galactosemia, galactokinase deficiency, trisomies (13, 18, 21), TORCH infections (eg, rubella), Marfan syndrome, Alport syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, neurofibromatosis 2. Iris Lens Suspended from ciliary body by zonule fbers. Muscular fbers and position. Iris Dilator muscle (α1) Sphincter muscle (M3) Ciliary body Trabecularmeshwork Cornea Sclera Canal of Schlemm Anterior chamber “Angle” of the eye Lens Trabecular outfow (90%) Drainage through trabecular meshwork canal of Schlemm  episcleral vasculature  agonist (eg, carbachol, pilocarpine) ↓↓↓Uveoscleral outfow (10%) Drainage into uvea and sclera with prostaglandin agonists (eg, latanoprost, bimatoprost) Aqueous humor Posterior chamber

Produced by nonpigmented epithelium on ciliary body and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (eg, acetazolamide) by β-blockers (eg, timolol), α2-agonists (eg, brimonidine),

Glaucoma Optic disc atrophy with characteristic cupping (normal A versus thinning of outer rim of optic nerve head B ), usually with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) and progressive peripheral visual field loss if untreated. Treatment is through pharmacologic or surgical lowering of IOP. Open-angle glaucoma Associated with  age, African-American race, family history. Painless, more common in US.
Auditory disorders are classified as either sen-sorineural or conductive. Conductive hearing loss results when sound waves are mechanically impeded from reaching the auditory sensory receptors within the internal ear. This type of hearing loss principally involves the external ear or structures of the middle ear. Conductive hearing loss is the second most common type of loss after sensorineural hear-ing loss, and it usually involves a reduction in sound level or the inability to hear faint sounds. A conductive hearing loss may be caused by otitis media (ear infection); in fact, this is the most common cause of temporary hearing loss in chil-dren. Fluid that collects in the tympanic cavity can also cause significant hearing problems in children. Other com-mon causes of conductive hearing loss include excess wax or foreign bodies in the external acoustic meatus or dis-eases that affect the ossicles in the middle ear (otosclero-sis; see also Folder 25.1). In many cases, conductive hearing loss can be treated either medically or surgically and may not be permanent. Sensorineural hearing impairment may also occur after injury to the auditory sensory hair cells within the inter-nal ear, cochlear division of cranial nerve VIII, nerve path-ways in the CNS, or auditory cortex. Sensorineural hearing loss accounts for about 90% of all hearing loss. It may be congenital or acquired. Causes of acquired sensorineural hearing loss include infections of the membranous labyrinth (e.g., meningitis, chronic otitis media), fractures of the tem-poral bone, acoustic trauma (i.e., prolonged exposure to excessive noise), and administration of certain classes of antibiotics and diuretics. Another example of sensorineural hearing loss often re-sults from aging. Sensorineural hearing loss not only in-volves a reduction in sound level; it also affects the ability to hear clearly or to distinguish speech. A loss of the sensory hair cells or associated nerve fibers begins in the basal turn of the cochlea and progresses apically over time.
The etiology of her hoarse voice was damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The recurrent laryngeal nerve lies close to the thyroid gland. It may be damaged in difficult surgical procedures, and this may produce unilateral spasm of the ipsilateral vocal cord to produce a hoarse voice. Since the thyroidectomy and institution of thyroxine treatment, the patient has lost weight and has no further complaints. A 33-year-old man was playing cricket for his local Sunday team. As the new bowler pitched the ball short, it bounced higher than he anticipated and hit him on the side of his head. He immediately fell to the ground unconscious, but after about 30 seconds he was helped to his feet and felt otherwise well. It was noted he had some bruising around his temple. He decided not to continue playing and went to watch the match from the side. Over the next hour he became extremely sleepy and was eventually unrousable. He was rushed to hospital. When he was admitted to hospital, the patient’s breathing was shallow and irregular and it was necessary to intubate him. A skull radiograph demonstrated a fracture in the region of the pterion. No other abnormality was demonstrated other than minor soft tissue bruising over the left temporal fossa. A CT scan was performed.
Each number in the box is the percent mortality rate for the grid defined by gestational age and birth weight range. (From Thomas P, Peabody J, Turnier V, et al: A new look at intrauterine growth and impact of race, attitude, and gender, Pediatrics 106:E21, 2000.) fontanelles should be soft and nonbulging, with the anterior larger than the posterior. A large fontanelle is associated with hydrocephalus, hypothyroidism, rickets, and other disorders. Soft areas away from the fontanelle are craniotabes; these lesions feel like a Ping-Pong ball when they are palpated. They may be a result of in utero compression. The skull should be examined carefully for signs of trauma or lacerations from internal fetal electrode sites or fetal scalp pH sampling; abscesses may develop in these areas. Face, Eyes, and Mouth

The face should be inspected for dysmorphic features, such as epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, preauricular tags or sinuses, low-set ears, long philtrum, and cleft lip or palate. Facial asymmetry may be a result of seventh nerve palsy; head tilt may be caused by torticollis. The eyes should open spontaneously, especially in an uprightposition. Before 28 weeks’ gestational age, the eyelids may befused. Coloboma, megalocornea, and microphthalmia suggestother malformations or intrauterine infections. A cloudy corneagreater than 1 cm in diameter also may be seen in congenitalglaucoma, uveal tract dysgenesis, and storage diseases. Conjunctival and retinal hemorrhages are common and usually of no significance. The pupillary response to light is present at 28weeks of gestation.
Mentioned throughout this chapter, hydrops is more ully described in Chapter 15 (p. 309). Fetuses with tumors >5 cm oten require cesarean delivery, and classical hysterotomy may be needed (Gucciardo, 2011). s shown in Figure 16-3 (p. 320), fetal surgery is suitable for some SCT cases. his rare anomaly is characterized by absence of the sacral spine and often portions of the lumbar spine. It is approximately 25 times more common in diabetic pregnancies (Garne, 2012). Sonographic indings include a spine that appears abnormally short, lacks normal lumbosacral curvature, and terminates abruptly above the level of the iliac wings. Because the sacrum does not lie between the iliac wings, they are abnormally close together and may appear "shield-like." here may also be abnormal positioning of the lower extremities and lack of normal local soft tissue development. Caudal regression should be diferentiated from sirenomelia, which is a rare anomaly characterized by a single fused lower extremity that occupies the midline. Normal fetal lips and nose are shown in Figure 10-19. A fetal profile is not a required component of standard examination but may be helpful in identiying cases of micrognathia-an abnormally small jaw (Fig. 10-20). Micrognathia should be considered in the evaluation of hydramnios (Chap. 11, p. 227). Use of the ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EI) procedure for severe micrognathia is discussed in Chapter 16 (p. 327).
Alzheimer neurofibrillary changes and neuritic plaques are practically always found in Down patients who are older than 40 years of age, as mentioned. It is possible to make the diagnosis of Down syndrome by demonstrating the chromosomal abnormalities in cells of the amniotic fluid. About one-third of pregnant mothers also have an abnormal elevation of serum alpha-fetoprotein in the second trimester of pregnancy. Other independent predictors of fetal Down syndrome are elevated serum chorionic gonadotropin and decreased estriol (Haddow et al). One can uncover a considerable proportion of the Down population by prenatal screening for these serum markers and by performing amniocentesis on women with positive tests to search for the chromosomal abnormality. Early detection is aided by the absence on imaging of a nasal bone between 11 and 14 weeks, at which time it is normally detected (Cicero et al). These are listed here with brief descriptions of their main features. 1. Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome). Frequency 1 in 2,000 live births, more female than male, average maternal age 31 years, microcephaly and sloping forehead, microphthalmos, coloboma of iris, corneal opacities, anosmia, low-set ears, cleft lip and palate, capillary hemangiomata, polydactyly, flexed fingers, posterior prominence of heels, dextrocardia, umbilical hernia, impaired hearing, hypertonia, severe cognitive impairment, death in early childhood. 2. Trisomy 18. Frequency 1 in 4,000 live births, more in females, average maternal age 34 years, slow growth, occasional seizures, severe cognitive impairment, hypertonia, ptosis and lid abnormalities, low-set ears, small mouth, mottled skin, clenched fists with index fingers overlapping the third finger, syndactyly, rocker-bottom feet, shortened big toe, ventricular septal defect, umbilical and inguinal hernias, short sternum, small pelvis, small mandible, death in early infancy. 3. Cri-du-chat syndrome (deletion in short arm of chromosome 5).
Pediatr 116:e356, 2005

Copel JA, Liang R, Demasio K, et al: he clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:813,e2000

Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85:20, 2009

Cruz-Martinez R, Figueras F, Hernandez-Andrade E, et al: Fetal brain Doppler to predict cesarean delivery for nonreassuring fetal status in term small-forgestational-age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 117:618, 2011

Curran PF, Jelin EB, Rand L, et al: Prenatal steroids for microcystic congenital adenomatoid malformations. J Pediatr Surg 45:145,e2010

Dashe JS, Mcintire DO, Twickler OM: Efect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1001,o2009

De Biasio P, Ginocchio G, Aicardi G, et al: Ossification timing of sacral vertebrae by ultrasound in the mid-second trimester of pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 23:1056,o2003

Debus A, Hagelstein C, Kilian A, et al: Fetal lung volume in congenital diaphragmatic hernia: association of prenatal MR imaging indings with postnatal chronic lung disease. Radiology 266(3):887,o2013

Derikx JP, De Backer A, Van De Schoot L, et al: Factors associated with recurrence and metastasis in sacrococcygeal teratoma. Br J Surg 93: 1543, 2006

Devaseelan P, Cardwell C, Bell B, et al: Prognosis of isolated mild to moderate fetal cerebral ventriculomegly: a systematic review. J Perinat Med 38:401, 20o10

De Veciana M, Major CA, Porto M: Prediction of an abnormal karyotype in fetuses with omphalocele. Prenat Diagn 14:487, 1994

DeVore GR, Falkensammer P, Sklansky MS, et al: Spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC): new technology for evaluation of the fetal heart. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 22:380, 2003

Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Bioi 686:349, 2010

Duncombe GJ, DickinsonoJE, Kikiros CS: Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(4): 950, 2002

Ecker JL, Shipp TO, Bromley B, et al: The sonographic diagnosis of DandyWalker and Dandy-Walker variant: associated indings and outcomes. Prenat Diagn 20:328, 2000

EUROCAT: Prenatal Detection Rates.
Between weeks 35 and 38 of gestation, rapid increase in the size of the fetus outpaces the growth of the uterus, and the relative amount of amniotic fluid (which normally acts as a cushion) also decreases. Thus, even the normal fetus is subjected to some degree of uterine constraint. However, several variables increase the likelihood of excessive compression of the fetus, including maternal conditions such as first pregnancy, small uterus, malformed (bicornuate) uterus, and leiomyomas. Causes relating to the fetus, such as presence of multiple fetuses, oligohydramnios, and abnormal fetal presentation, also may be involved. Sequence refers to multiple congenital anomalies that result from secondary effects of a single localized aberration in organogenesis. The initiating event may be a malformation, deformation, or disruption. An excellent example is the oligohydramnios (or Potter) sequence (

Fig. 7.23A ). Oligohydramnios (decreased amniotic fluid) may be caused by a variety of maternal, placental, or fetal abnormalities, including chronic leakage of amniotic fluid because of rupture of the amnion; uteroplacental insufficiency resulting from maternal hypertension or severe toxemia; and renal agenesis in the fetus (because fetal urine is a major constituent of amniotic fluid). The fetal compression associated with oligohydramnios in turn results in a classic phenotype in the newborn infant consisting of flattened faces and positional abnormalities of the hands and feet (

Fig. 7.23B ). The hips may be dislocated. Growth of the chest wall and the lungs also is compromised, sometimes to such an extent that

Fig. 7.22 Disruptionduetoamnioticbands.Inthespecimenshown,theplacentaisattheright,andthebandofamnionextendsfromthetopportionoftheamnioticsactoencirclethelegofthefetus. (Courtesy of Dr.Theonia Boyd, Children’s Hospital of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts.)
He reports drinking about 6 beers per day. In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and an HIV test returns with a positive result. What drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmonary tubercu-losis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) would be likely to cause toxicity? Mycobacteria are intrinsically resistant to most antibiotics. Because they grow more slowly than other bacteria, antibiotics that are most active against rapidly growing cells are relatively ineffective. Mycobacterial cells can also be dormant and, thus, resistant to many drugs or killed only very slowly. The lipid-rich mycobacterial cell wall is impermeable to many agents. Mycobacterial species are intracellular pathogens, and organisms residing within macrophages are inaccessible to drugs that penetrate these cells poorly. Finally, mycobacteria are notorious for their ability to develop resistance. Combinations of two or more drugs are required to overcome these obstacles and to prevent emergence of resistance during the course of therapy. The response of mycobacterial infections to chemotherapy is slow, and treatment must be administered for months to years, depending on which drugs are used.
Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2012;5:569. Juurlink DN et al: Drug-drug interactions among elderly patients hospitalized for drug toxicity. JAMA 2003;289:1652. Leucuta SE, Vlase L: Pharmacokinetics and metabolic drug interactions. Curr Clin Pharmacol 2006;1:5. Meng Q, Lin K: Pharmacokinetic interactions between herbal medicines and prescribed drugs: Focus on drug metabolic enzymes and transporters. Curr Drug Metab 2014;15:791. Pelkonen O et al: Inhibition and induction of human cytochrome P450 enzymes: Current status. Arch Toxicol 2008;82:667. Roberts JA, et al: The clinical relevance of plasma protein binding changes. Clin Pharmacokinet 2013;52:1. Thelen K, Dressman JB: Cytochrome P540-mediated metabolism in the human gut wall. J Pharm Pharmacol 2009;61:541. Zakeri-Milani P, Valzadeh H: Intestinal transporters: Enhanced absorption through P-glycoprotein-related drug interactions. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2014;10:859.
Pain should be adequately controlled and meperi-dine should be avoided for pain management. Caution should be used when prescribing antihistamine H1 antagonists (such as diphenhydramine/Benadryl) and medications with antihista-mine effects. Of note, there is no increased risk associated with neuroleptics (antipsychotics) and digoxin and no conclusive evi-dence against using H2 agonists, tricyclic antidepressants, anti-Parkinson medications, steroids, NSAIDs, and antimuscarinics in the perioperative setting.Certain medications, such as β-blockers or statins, may be beneficial to start preoperatively in order to reduce risk of perioperative adverse events such as cardiac complications and stroke. There are ACC/AHA guidelines to support the use of perioperative β-blockers in patients who are already taking them, particularly those with independent cardiac indications such as arrhythmia or history of myocardial infarction and in patients who are undergoing intermediate risk or vascular surgery with no known coronary artery disease or with multiple clinical risk factors for ischemic heart disease. Statins should be started as soon as possible prior to surgery in patients who have known vascular disease, elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or ischemia on thallium testing. They may also be considered in patients undergoing vascular and intermediate-risk surgery.Additionally, medications doses should be adjusted based on renal function. Older patients are at greater risk for renal impairment and chronic kidney disease; furthermore, adjustment of medications that are renally cleared is an important consider-ation. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), rather than creatinine, is the best overall measure of renal function due to the fact that the ratio of GFR to creatinine decreases with increasing age.22Finally, medication use is very common among the older population, and older individuals should be monitored for polypharmacy and potential adverse interactions. This is of real concern since 40% of individuals age 65 years and older are taking five or more medications prescribed by more than one doctor.45 Additionally, 68% of older adults use over-the-counter medications, dietary supplements, or both concurrently with prescription medications.46 Of note, polypharmacy has been associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment, morbidity, and mortality, and the risk of adverse drug reactions increases with a greater number of medications.45,47Patient CounselingDetermination of the patient’s preferences and expectations prior to surgery is an essential component to preoperative assessment and decision making. One study demonstrated that agreement between patients and their surrogates (primary care providers and close family members) was poor, despite patients predicting that their physicians (90%) and family members (87%) would accurately represent their wishes. Instead, they found that per-cent of agreement ranged from 59% to 88%, suggesting that sub-stituted judgement may not be a good proxy for an individual patient’s wishes.48 Another study looked at older patients with limited life expectancy due to cancer, congestive heart failure, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and found that 99% of patients would undergo a low-burden treatment to restore current health (with the alternative being death), but that 74% and 89% would forgo treatment if it resulted in severe functional or cognitive impairment, respectively.49 Furthermore, it is imperative that the surgeon have a substantive discussion with the patient prior to sur-gery to determine their preferences and expectations and that fam-ily members and potential decision-making surrogates be involved. The ACS NSQIP/AGS Guidelines recommend that the following four points be included in these conversations:1. Ensure that the patient has an advance directive and desig-nated health care proxy.2. Discuss treatment goals and plans with the patient to ensure that the physician understands the patient’s preferences and expectations. This should be documented in the medical record.3.
The high-risk groups, as defined by the CDC, are listedin Table 9-3. In general the standardized purified protein derivative intradermal test is used with evaluation by a health care provider 48 to 72 hours after injection. The size of induration, notthe color of any mark, denotes a positive test. For most patients,

Does the child spend any time in a building built before 1960 (e.g., home, school, barn) that has cracked or peeling paint? Is there a brother, sister, housemate, playmate, or community member being followed or treated (or even rumored to be) for lead poisoning? Does the child live with an adult whose job or hobby involves exposure to lead (e.g., lead smelting and automotive radiator repair)? Does the child live near an active lead smelter, battery recycling plant, or other industry likely to release lead? Does the family use home remedies or pottery from another country? Close contact with persons known to have tuberculosis (TB), positive TB test, or suspected to have TB

Foreign-born persons from areas with high TB rates (Asia, Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Russia)

High-risk racial or ethnic minorities or other populations at higher risk (Asian, Pacific Islander, Hispanic, African American, Native American, groups living in poverty [e.g., Medicaid recipients], migrant farm workers, homeless persons, substance abusers)

Infants, children, and adolescents exposed to adults in high-risk categories 10 mm of induration is a positive test. For HIV-positive patients,those with recent tuberculosis contacts, patients with evidenceof old healed tuberculosis on chest film, or immunosuppressedpatients, 5 mm is a positive test (see Chapter 124). The CDC hasapproved (in adults) the QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test, whichhas the advantage of needing one office visit only. Children and adolescents who have a family history of cardiovascular disease or have at least one parent with a high blood cholesterol level are at increased risk of having high blood cholesterol levels as adults and increased risk of coronary heart disease. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends dyslipidemia screening in the context of regular health care for at-risk populations (Table 9-4) by obtaining a fasting lipid profile. The recommended screening levels are the same for all children 2 to 18 years. Total cholesterol of less than 170 mg/dL is normal, 170 to 199 mg/dL is borderline, and greater than 200 mg/dL is elevated.
On the other hand, drugs that are not sus-sulfonamides but is not recommended in HIV-infected patients who pected and are important for the patient (e.g., antihypertensive agents) manifested erythroderma or a bullous reaction in response to their generally should not be quickly withdrawn. This approach prevents earlier sulfonamide exposure. reluctance to future use of these agents. In patients with history suggesting immediate IgE-mediated reac tions to penicillin, skin-prick testing with penicillins or cephalosporins has proved useful for identifying patients at risk of anaphylactic reac-The aims are (1) to prevent the recurrence of the drug eruption and (2) tions to these agents. However, skin tests themselves carry a small risknot to compromise future treatments by contraindicating otherwise of anaphylaxis. Negative skin tests do not totally rule out IgE-mediateduseful medications. reactivity, but the risk of anaphylaxis in response to penicillin admin-Begin with thorough assessment of drug causality. Drug causality istration in patients with negative skin tests is about 1%. In contrast, is evaluated based on timing of the reaction, evaluation of other postwo-thirds of patients with a positive skin test experience an allergicsible causes, effect of drug withdrawal or continuation, and knowledge response upon rechallenge. of medications that have been associated with the observed reaction. For patients with delayed-type hypersensitivity, the clinical utilityCombination of these criteria leads to considering the causality as of skin tests is more questionable. At least one of a combination ofdefinite, probable, possible, or unlikely. The RegiSCAR group has several tests (prick, patch, and intradermal) is positive in 50–70% ofproposed a useful algorithm called Algorithm of Drug Causality for patients with a reaction “definitely” attributed to a single medication. Epidermal Necrolysis (ALDEN) to determine drug causality in SJS/ This low sensitivity corresponds to the observation that readministra-TEN. A drug with a “definite” or “probable” causality should be tion of drugs with negative skin testing resulted in eruptions in 17%contraindicated, a warning card or medical alert tag (e.g., wristband) of cases.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Zandi PP et al: Hormone replacement therapy and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in older women. JAMA 2002;288:2123. The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her osteoporosis. Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD, & Umesh Masharani, MBBS, MRCP (UK)

A 66-year-old obese Caucasian man presented to an academic Diabetes Center for advice regarding his diabetes treatment. His diabetes was diagnosed 10 years previously on routine testing. He was initially given metformin but when his control deteriorated, the metformin was stopped and insulin treatment initiated. The patient was taking 50 units of insulin glargine and an average of 25 units of insulin aspartate pre-meals. He had never seen a diabetes educator or a dietitian. He was checking his glucose levels 4 times a day. He was smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day. On examination, his weight was 132 kg (BMI 39.5); blood pressure 145/71; and signs of mild peripheral neuropathy were present. Laboratory tests noted an HbA1c value of 8.1%, urine albumin 3007 mg/g creatinine (normal <30), serum creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (0.61–1.24), total choles-terol 128 mg/dL, triglycerides 86 mg/dL, HDL cholesterol 38 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 73 mg/dL (on atorvastatin 40 mg daily). How would you treat this patient?
Those proteins include cell attachment/ with hypertension (>140/90 mmHg), patients with pre-hypertension (>120/80 mmHg but <140/90 mmHg), and individuals with normal blood pressure (<120/80 mmHg). In patients who have the metabolic syndrome without diabetes, the best choice for the initial antihypertensive medication is an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker, as these two classes of drugs appear to reduce the incidence of new-onset type 2 diabetes. In all patients with hypertension, a sodium-restricted dietary pattern enriched in fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy products should be advocated. Home monitoring of blood pressure may assist in maintaining good blood-pressure control. IMPAIRED FASTING GLUCOSE (SEE ALSO CHAP. 417)

In patients with the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, aggressive glycemic control may favorably modify fasting levels of triglycerides and/or HDL cholesterol. In patients with impaired fasting glucose who do not have diabetes, a lifestyle intervention that includes weight reduction, dietary fat restriction, and increased physical activity has been shown to reduce the incidence of type 2 diabetes. Metformin also reduces the incidence of diabetes, although the effect is less pronounced than that of lifestyle intervention. INSULIN RESISTANCE (SEE ALSO CHAP. 418)

Several drug classes (biguanides, thiazolidinediones [TZDs]) increase insulin sensitivity. Because insulin resistance is the primary pathophysiologic mechanism for the metabolic syndrome, representative drugs in these classes reduce its prevalence. Both metformin and TZDs enhance insulin action in the liver and suppress endogenous glucose production. TZDs, but not metformin, also improve insulin-mediated glucose uptake in muscle and adipose tissue. Benefits of both drugs have been seen in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and polycystic ovary syndrome, and the drugs have been shown to reduce markers of inflammation. signaling proteins such as thrombospondin, osteopontin, and fibronectin; calcium-binding proteins such as matrix gla protein and osteocalcin; and proteoglycans such as biglycan and decorin.
This risk is bilateral for lobular lesions and ipsilateral for ductal lesions. A family history of breast cancer added little risk for women with nonproliferative disease, but family history plus atypia increased breast cancer risk 11-fold. The presence of cysts alone did not increase the risk of breast cancer, but cysts combined with a family history of breast cancer increased the risk about threefold (76,92–97). Women with these risk factors (family history of breast cancer and proliferative breast disease) should be followed carefully with physical examination and mammography. For such women, age-specific probability of developing invasive breast carcinoma in the next 10 years is 1 in 2,000 (age 20), 1 in 256 (age 30), 1 in 67 (age 40), 1 in 39 (age 50), and 1 in 29 (age 60) (93). The relative risk for developing breast cancer depends on the type of proliferative lesion diagnosed. Management of Fibrocystic Change

Fibrocystic change is a normal evolutionary change in breast development and involution and does not require a specific treatment other than a good clinical breast examination and age-appropriate mammographic screening or imaging studies directed to signs and symptoms. A number of nutritional and dietary supplements were investigated to relieve symptoms. The role of caffeine consumption in the aggravation of fibrocystic change is controversial (98– 101). Results of some studies suggest that eliminating caffeine from the diet is associated with improvement of symptoms (100,101). Many patients are aware of these studies and report relief of symptoms after discontinuing intake of coffee, tea, and chocolate. Similarly, many women find vitamin E (150 to 600 IU daily) or B6 (200 to 800 mg per day) helpful (102,103). Observations about these effects are difficult to confirm and are anecdotal (104–106). A recent review of nutritional interventions for fibrocystic breast conditions that evaluated evening primrose oil, vitamin E, or pyridoxine suggested that there are insufficient data to draw clear conclusions about their effectiveness (107). Exacerbations of pain, tenderness, and cyst formation may occur at any time until menopause, when symptoms usually subside unless patients are taking estrogen.
Smoking one or two cigars daily doubles the risk for oral and esophageal cancers; smoking three or four cigars daily increases the risk of oral cancers more than eightfold and esophageal cancer fourfold. The risks of occasional use are unknown. Smokeless tobacco also represents a substantial health risk. Chewing tobacco is a carcinogen linked to dental caries, gingivitis, oral leukoplakia, and oral cancer. The systemic effects of smokeless tobacco (including snuff) may increase risks for other cancers. Esophageal cancer is linked to carcinogens in tobacco dissolved in saliva and swallowed. The net effects of e-cigarettes on health are poorly studied. Whether they aid in smoking cessation or serve as a “gateway” for nonsmoking children to acquire a smoking habit is debated. Physical activity is associated with a decreased risk of colon and breast cancer. A variety of mechanisms have been proposed. However, such studies are prone to confounding factors such as recall bias, association of exercise with other health-related practices, and effects of preclinical cancers on exercise habits (reverse causality). International epidemiologic studies suggest that diets high in fat are associated with increased risk for cancers of the breast, colon, prostate, and endometrium. These cancers have their highest incidence and mortalities in Western cultures, where fat composes an average of one-third of the total calories consumed. Despite correlations, dietary fat has not been proven to cause cancer. Case-control and cohort epidemiologic studies give conflicting results.
Berkson bias—cases and/ or controls selected from hospitals are less healthy and have different exposures than general population

Attrition bias—participants lost to follow up have a different prognosis than those who complete the study Randomization

Ensure the choice of the right comparison/reference group

Recall bias Awareness of disorder alters Patients with disease recall Decrease time from exposure recall by subjects; common in exposure after learning of to follow-up retrospective studies similar cases

Measurement bias Information is gathered in a Using a faulty automatic Use objective, standardized, systemically distorted manner sphygmomanometer to and previously tested methods measure BP of data collection that are Hawthorne effect—participants planned ahead of time change behavior upon Use placebo group awareness of being observed

Procedure bias Subjects in different groups are Patients in treatment group not treated the same spend more time in highly specialized hospital units

Blinding (masking) and use of placebo reduce influence of participants and researchers on procedures and interpretation of outcomes as neither are aware of group assignments

Confounding bias Factor related to both exposure and outcome (but not on causal path) distorts effect of exposure on outcome (vs effect modification, in which the exposure leads to different outcomes in subgroups stratified by the factor)

An uncontrolled study shows an association between drinking coffee and lung cancer. However, coffee drinkers also smoke more, which can account for the association Multiple/repeated studies

Crossover studies (subjects act as their own controls)

Matching (patients with similar characteristics in both treatment and control groups)

Lead-time bias Early detection is confused Early detection makes it seem Measure “back-end” survival with  survival like survival has increased, (adjust survival according to but the disease’s natural the severity of disease at the history has not changed time of diagnosis)

Length-time bias Screening test detects diseases A slowly progressive cancer A randomized controlled trial with long latency period, is more likely detected by a assigning subjects to the while those with shorter screening test than a rapidly screening program or to no latency period become progressive cancer screening symptomatic earlier

Mode = most common value. Least affected by outliers. Measures of Standard deviation = how much variability σ = SD; n = sample size. dispersion exists in a set of values, around the mean of Variance = (SD)2. these values. SE = σ/√n. Standard error = an estimate of how much SE  as n . variability exists in a (theoretical) set of sample means around the true population mean. Normal distribution Gaussian, also called bell-shaped. Mean = median = mode. 68% 95% 99.7%

Bimodal Suggests two different populations (eg, metabolic polymorphism such as fast vs slow acetylators; age at onset of Hodgkin lymphoma; suicide rate by age). Positive skew Typically, mean > median > mode. Asymmetry with longer tail on right. Negative skew Typically, mean < median < mode. Mode Asymmetry with longer tail on left.
Studies of "moderate" intake-less than 200 mg daily-did not indicate increased risk (Savitz, 2008; Weng, 2008). In contrast, in one prospective cohort of more than 5100 gravidas, cafeine was linked to miscarriage but not in a dose-response relationship (Hahn, 2015). Currently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016e) has concluded that moderate consumption likely is not a major abortion risk and that any associated risk with higher intake is unsettled. Environmental toxins suggested to have a possible link to miscarriage include bisphenol A, phthalates, polychlorinated biphenyls, and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) (Krieg, 2016). Even fewer studies implicate occupational exposures. In a follow-up of the Nurses Health Study II, Lawson and associates (2012) reported slightly increased miscarriage risks in nurses exposed to sterilizing agents, x-rays, and antineoplastic drugs. Also, a higher miscarriage risk was found for dental assistants exposed to more than 3 hours of nitrous oxide daily if there was no gas-scavenging equipment (Boivin, 1997). Increasing paternal age is signiicantly associated with an greater risk for abortion (de La Rochebrochard, 2003). In the Jerusalem Perinatal Study, this risk was lowest before age 25 years, after which it progressively increased at 5-year intervals (Kleinhaus, 2006). The etiology of this association is not well studied, but chromosomal abnormalities in spermatozoa likely play a role (Sartorius, 2010). his diagnosis is presumed when bloody vaginal discharge or bleeding appears through a closed cervical os during the first 20 weeks. This bleeding in early pregnancy must be diferentiated from that with implantation, which some women have at the time of their expected menses. Aside from this, almost one fourth of women develop bleeding during early gestation that may persist for days or weeks. It may be accompanied by suprapubic discomfort, mild cramps, pelvic pressure, or persistent low backache. Of symptoms, bleeding is by far the most predictive risk factor for pregnancy loss.
There is no compelling evidence that moderate exercise during pregnancy is associated with spontaneous abortion. In the absence of cervical anatomic abnormalities or incompetent cervix, coitus does not appear to increase the risk for spontaneous pregnancy loss (304,305). Exposure to three particular substances—alcohol, cigarettes, and caffeine—deserves specific attention. Although some conﬂicting data exist, one very large epidemiologic study has shown that alcohol consumption during the first trimester of pregnancy, at levels as low as three drinks per week, is associated with an increased incidence of spontaneous pregnancy loss (306–308). Cigarette smoking has also been linked to early spontaneous pregnancy loss; however, this is also not without controversy (309–311). Alcohol and tobacco intake in the male partner correlates with the incidence of domestic violence, which in turn is associated with early pregnancy loss (312). Finally, recent evidence adds to a growing body of literature that suggests consumption of coffee and other caffeinated beverages during early pregnancy is linked to adverse pregnancy outcome (309,313). The most publicized recent report casts doubt on the definition of a lower limit for safe use of caffeine in the first trimester of pregnancy (309). Obesity, stress at work, and use of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agents during early pregnancy have all been linked to an increased rate of isolated spontaneous pregnancy loss (314–317). Investigative measures that are potentially useful in the evaluation of recurrent spontaneous abortion include obtaining a thorough history from both partners, performing a physical assessment of the woman (with attention to the pelvic examination), and a limited amount of laboratory testing (Table 33.3). History A description of all prior pregnancies and their sequence as well as whether histologic assessment and karyotype determinations were performed on previously aborted tissues are important aspects of the history. Approximately 60% of abortuses lost before 8 weeks of gestation were reported to be chromosomally abnormal; most of these pregnancies are affected by some type of trisomy, particularly trisomy 16 (318,319). The most common single chromosomal abnormality is monosomy X (45X), especially among anembryonic conceptuses (320). Aneuploid losses are particularly prevalent among women with recurrent pregnancy loss who are over the age of 35 (8). Although somewhat controversial, the detection of aneuploidy in miscarriage specimens may be less when the couple experiencing recurrent abortions is euploidic.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Because trimethoprim is more lipid-soluble than sulfamethoxazole, it has a larger volume of distribution than the latter drug. Therefore, when 1 part of trimethoprim is given with 5 parts of sulfamethoxazole (the ratio in the formulation), the peak plasma concentrations are in the ratio of 1:20, which is optimal for the combined effects of these drugs in vitro. About 30–50% of the sulfonamide and 50–60% of the trimethoprim (or their respective metabolites) are excreted in the urine within 24 hours. The dose should be reduced by half for patients with creatinine clearances of 15–30 mL/min. Trimethoprim (a weak base) concentrates in prostatic fluid and in vaginal fluid, which are more acidic than plasma. Therefore, it has more antibacterial activity in prostatic and vaginal fluids than many other antimicrobial drugs. A. Oral Trimethoprim

Trimethoprim can be given alone (100 mg twice daily) in acute urinary tract infections. Many community-acquired organisms are susceptible to the high concentrations that are found in the urine (200–600 mcg/mL). B. Oral Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)

A combination of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is effective treatment for a wide variety of infections including P jiroveci pneumonia, urinary tract infections, prostatitis, and some infections caused by susceptible strains of Shigella, Salmonella, and nontuberculous mycobacteria. It is active against most Staphylococcus aureus strains, both methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant, and against respiratory tract pathogens such as Haemophilus sp, Moraxella catarrhalis, and K pneumoniae (but not Mycoplasma pneumoniae). However, the increasing prevalence of strains of E coli (up to 30% or more) and pneumococci that are resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole must be considered before using this combination for empiric therapy of upper urinary tract infections or pneumonia. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is commonly used for the treatment of uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections. One double-strength tablet (each tablet contains trimethoprim 160 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 800 mg) given every 12 hours is effective treatment for urinary tract infections, prostatitis, uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections, and infections caused by susceptible strains of Shigella and Salmonella.
Mandell LA et al: Infectious Disease Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:S27. Mwenya DM et al: Impact of cotrimoxazole on carriage and antibiotic resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae in HIV-infected children in Zambia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:3756. Nouira S et al: Standard versus newer antibacterial agents in the treatment of severe acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A randomized trial of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole versus ciprofloxacin. Clin Infect Dis 2010;51:143. Rodriguez-Martinez JM et al: Plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance: An update. J Infect Chemother 2011;17:149. Scheld WM: Maintaining fluoroquinolone class efficacy: Review of influencing factors. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:1. Schmitz GR et al: Randomized controlled trial of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for uncomplicated skin abscesses in patients at risk for community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. Ann Emerg Med 2010;56:283. Strom BL et al: Absence of cross-reactivity between sulfonamide antibiotics and sulfonamide nonantibiotics. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1628. Talan DA et al: Prevalence of and risk factor analysis of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleand fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli infection among emergency department patients with pyelonephritis.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is commonly used for the treatment of uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections. One double-strength tablet (each tablet contains trimethoprim 160 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 800 mg) given every 12 hours is effective treatment for urinary tract infections, prostatitis, uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections, and infections caused by susceptible strains of Shigella and Salmonella. Bone and joint infections caused by S. aureus can be effectively treated, typically at doses of 8–10 mg/kg per day of the trimethoprim component. One single-strength tablet (containing trimethoprim 80 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 400 mg) given three times weekly may serve as prophylaxis in recurrent urinary tract infections of some women. The dosage for children treated for shigellosis, urinary tract infection, or otitis media is trimethoprim 8 mg/kg per day and sulfamethoxazole 40 mg/kg per day divided every 12 hours. Infections with P jiroveci and some other pathogens, such as Nocardia or Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, can be treated with high doses of the either the oral or intravenous combination (dosed on the basis of the trimethoprim component at 15–20 mg/kg/d). P jiroveci can be prevented in immunosuppressed patients by a number of low dose regimens such as one double-strength tablet daily or three times weekly. C. Intravenous Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole

A solution of the mixture containing 80 mg trimethoprim plus 400 mg sulfamethoxazole per 5 mL diluted in 125 mL of 5% dextrose in water can be administered by intravenous infusion over 60–90 minutes. It is the agent of choice for moderately severe to severe pneumocystis pneumonia. It has been used for Gram-negative bacterial sepsis, but has largely been replaced by extended spectrum β-lactams and fluoroquinolones. It may be an effective alternative for infections caused by some multidrugresistant species such as Enterobacter and Serratia; shigellosis; or typhoid. It is the preferred alternate therapy for serious Listeria infections in patients unable to tolerate ampicillin. The dosage is 10–20 mg/kg/d of the trimethoprim component. D. Oral Pyrimethamine with Sulfonamide

Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine are used in the treatment of toxoplasmosis. The dosage of sulfadiazine is 1–1.5 g four times daily, with pyrimethamine given as a 200-mg loading dose followed by a once-daily dose of 50–75 mg. Leucovorin, also known as folinic acid, 10 mg orally each day, should be administered to minimize bone marrow suppression seen with pyrimethamine.
Sobel JD, Wiesenfeld HC, Martens M, et al. Maintenance ﬂuconazole therapy for recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis. N Engl J Med 2004;351:876–883. 28. Sobel JD. Desquamative inﬂammatory vaginitis: a new subgroup of purulent vaginitis responsive to topical 2% clindamycin therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:1215–1220. 29. Kiviat NB, Paavonen JA, Wolner-Hanssen P, et al. Histopathology of endocervical infection caused by Chlamydia trachomatis, herpes simplex virus, Trichomonas vaginalis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Hum Pathol 1990;21:831–837. 30. Brunham RC, Paavonen J, Stevens CE, et al. Mucopurulent cervicitis: the ignored counterpart in women of urethritis in men. N Engl J Med 1984;311:1–6.
Gram stain, culture, or broad-range bacterial PCR may lead to microbiologic diagnosis. The pleural fluid should be cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses. If the fluid is grossly purulent, removal reduces the patient’s toxicity and associated discomfort and may facilitate more rapid recovery. If the accumulation is large and impairs the ability of the lung to expand, removal of the fluid improves pulmonary mechanics and gas exchange. Frontal and lateral radiographs are required to localize disease and adequately visualize retrocardiac infiltrates and are recommended for diagnosis among hospitalized children, but they are not necessary to confirm the diagnosis in well-appearing outpatients. Although there are characteristic radiographic findings of pneumonia, radiography alone cannot provide a definitive microbiologic diagnosis. Bacterial pneumonia characteristically shows lobar consolidation, or a round pneumonia, with pleural effusion in 10% to 30% of cases (Fig. 110-1).Viral pneumonia characteristically shows diffuse, streaky infiltrates of bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-2) and hyperinflation. Atypical pneumonia, such as with M. pneumoniae and

Figure 110-1 Acute lobar pneumonia of the lingula in a 6-year-old child with high fever, cough, and chest pain. Frontal chest radiograph shows airspace consolidation, which obliterates the silhouette of the heart border on the left. The left hemidiaphragm is mildly elevated as a result of splinting. (From Markowitz RI: Diagnostic imaging. In Jen-son HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 133.) Figure 110-2 Diffuse viral bronchopneumonia in a 12-year-old boy with cough, fever, and wheezing.
The evaluation of a neutropenic child depends on clinical signs of infection, family and medication history, age of the patient, cyclic or persistent nature of the condition, signs of bone marrow infiltration (malignancy or storage disease), and evidence of involvement of other cell lines. Neutropenia is confirmed by a complete blood count and differential. A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy may be necessary to determine whether the neutropenia is due to a failure of production in the bone marrow, infiltration of the bone marrow, or loss of neutrophils in the periphery. Antineutrophil antibodies help diagnose autoimmune neutropenia. Neutrophil chemotactic defects can be excluded by the presence of neutrophils at the site of infection. The Rebuck skin window is a 4-hour in vivo test for neutrophil chemotaxis thatis not performed routinely by most laboratories. In vitro studies of neutrophil migration are available in specialized laboratories.Flow cytometry for the presence of adhesion molecules, such as CD18 or CD15, can help diagnose leukocyte adhesion defects.Point mutations that affect the function of the adhesion molecule but do not alter antibody binding are missed using flow cytometry. CGD can be diagnosed by the flow cytometry-based test usingdihydrorhodamine 123 or the nitroblue tetrazolium test (seeChapter 72). Light microscopy of neutrophils for the presence ofgiant granules can help diagnose Chédiak-Higashi syndrome. Therapy for neutropenia depends on the underlying cause. Patients with severe bacterial infections require broad-spectrum antibiotics; the resolution of neutropenia is the most important prognostic factor. Most patients with severe congenital neutropenia or autoimmune neutropenia respond to therapy with G-CSF. Granulocyte transfusion should be reserved for life-threatening infection. Chronic mild neutropenia not associated with immunosuppression can be managed expectantly with prompt antimicrobial treatment of softtissue infections, which usually are caused by S. aureus or group A streptococcus. Frequent courses of antibiotics, including trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis, and surgical débridement of infections are required in CGD.
For purposes of clarity, we have to differ-entiate between contamination, colonization, and infection. Contamination is the presence of bacteria without multiplica-tion, colonization is multiplication without host response, and infection is the presence of host response in reaction to depo-sition and multiplication of bacteria. The presence of a host response helps to differentiate between infection and coloniza-tion as seen in chronic wounds. The host response that helps in diagnosing wound infection comprises cellulitis, abnormal discharge, delayed healing, change in pain, abnormal granula-tion tissue, bridging, and abnormal color and odor.As discussed previously, neutrophils play a major role in preventing wound infections. Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) comprises a genetically heterogeneous group of dis-eases in which the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-dependent oxide enzyme is deficient. This defect impairs the intracellular killing of microorganisms, leav-ing the patient liable to infection by bacteria and fungi. Afflicted patients have recurrent infections and form granulomas, which can lead to obstruction of the gastric antrum and genitourinary tracts and poor wound healing. Surgeons become involved when the patient develops infectious or obstructive complications.The nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction test is used to diagnose CGD. Normal neutrophils can reduce this com-pound, while neutrophils from affected patients do not, facili-tating the diagnosis via a colorimetric test. Clinically, patients develop recurrent infections such as pneumonia, lymphadenitis, hepatic abscess, and osteomyelitis. Organisms most commonly responsible are S. aureus, Aspergillus, Klebsiella, Serratia, or Candida. When CGD patients require surgery, a preoperative pulmonary function test should be considered since they are predisposed to obstructive and restrictive lung disease. Wound complications, mainly infection, are common. Sutures should be removed as late as possible since the wounds heal slowly. Abscess drains should be left in place for a prolonged period until the infection is completely resolved.93Hyperglycemia has been shown to be a significant risk factor of postoperative infections.94 Tight blood glucose con-trol, beginning preoperatively and continued into the operating room and beyond, has been associated with significant reduc-tion in infectious complications, in particular following cardiac surgery.95,96 Too tight of a glycemic control (80–100 mg/dL) appears to be associated with more complications and is as effec-tive, if not less than, moderate control (120–180 mg/dL).97,98Another host factor that has been implicated in the devel-opment of superficial surgical site infection relates to the state of the subcutaneous capillary bed.
Inspissation of mucus in the reproductive tract leads toreproductive dysfunction in both males and females. In males,congenital absence of the vas deferens and azoospermia arenearly universal. In females, secondary amenorrhea is oftenpresent as a result of chronic illness and reduced body weight.Fertility is also diminished by abnormal secretions in the fallopian tubes and cervix, but women with CF can conceive. All infants with a positive newborn screen and/or with meconium ileus should be evaluated for CF. The diagnosis of CF should be seriously considered in any infant presenting with failure to thrive, cholestatic jaundice, chronic respiratory symptoms, or electrolyte abnormalities (hyponatremia, hypochloremia, metabolic alkalosis). CF should be in the differential diagnosis of children with chronic respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms, especially if there is digital clubbing. Any child with nasal polyps, especially those younger than 12 years, should be evaluated for CF. All siblings of patients with CF should also be evaluated. Readily available commercial DNA tests detect many CF mutations, but because there are more than 1500 identified mutations (and others yet to be identified), DNA analysis will not detect all cases of CF. All U.S. states have newborn screening for CF, based either on elevated immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) levels or DNA tests, identifying the majority of infants with CF, but there are both false-positive and false-negative results. Therefore, the diagnostic test of choice is still the sweat test. Indications for performing a sweat test are listed in Table 137-2. The following criteria should be met to establish the diagnosis of CF:The presence of one or more typical clinical features of CF (chronic pulmonary disease, characteristic gastrointestinal and nutritional abnormalities, salt loss syndromes, or 1. Two elevated sweat chloride tests performed at an accredited CF Foundation certified laboratory (positive if the value is >60 mEq/L, borderline if 40 to 60 mEq/L, and negative if <40mEq/L, with adequate sweat collection) 2. Two mutations known to cause CF identified by DNA analysis or 3.

because a sibling has CF, positive sweat chloride testing or the

Recurrent wheezing/difficult to control asthma Recurrent or persistent atelectasis Hemoptysis Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the respiratory tract (if not explained by other factors, e.g., tracheostomy or prolonged intubation)

Meconium ileus Neonatal intestinal obstruction (meconium plug, atresia) Steatorrhea, malabsorption Hepatic cirrhosis in childhood (including any manifestations such as esophageal varices or portal hypertension) Cholestatic jaundice in infancy Pancreatitis Rectal prolapse Fat-soluble vitamin deficiency states (A, D, E, K) Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, peripheral edema

Prolonged, direct-reacting neonatal jaundice MISCELLANEOUS

Digital clubbing Failure to thrive Family history of cystic fibrosis (e.g., in sibling or cousin) Salty taste of skin (typically noted by parent on kissing affected child—from salt crystals formed after evaporation of sweat) Hyponatremic hypochloremic alkalosis in infants Nasal polyps Recurrent sinusitis Aspermia Absent vas deferens presence of known disease-causing DNA mutations are the only criteria required for diagnosis, as clinical symptoms may not be manifested early in life.
Hx/PE: Presents with headache, fever, impaired mentation, and absent meningismus. The differential includes toxoplasmosis, lymphoma, TB meningitis, AIDS dementia complex, PML, HSV encephalitis, and other fungal disease. Dx: LP (↓ CSF glucose; ↑ protein; ↑ leukocyte count with monocytic predominance, ↑↑ opening pressure); CSF cryptococcal antigen test, India ink stain, and fungal culture. Tx: ■IV amphotericin B + f ucytosine × 2 weeks; then give f uconazole 400 mg × 8 weeks. Lifelong maintenance therapy should be administered with fuconazole 200 mg QD, or until CD4+ is > 200 for > 6 months. ■↑ opening pressure may require serial LPs or VP shunt for management. Risk factors include AIDS, spelunking, and exposure to bird or bat excrement, especially in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys. 1° exposure is often asymptomatic or causes a f ulike illness. Presentation may range from no symptoms to fulminant disease with pulmonary or extrapulmonary manifestations. Fever, weight loss, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, nonproductive cough, and pancytopenia indicate disseminated infection (most often within 14 days). The differential includes atypical bacterial pneumonias, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, TB, sarcoidosis, pneumoconiosis, and lymphoma. CXR shows diffuse nodular densities, focal infltrate, cavity, or hilar lymphadenopathy (chronic infection is usually cavitary). The urine and serum polysaccharide antigen test is the most sensitive test for making the initial diagnosis, monitoring response to therapy, and diagnosing relapse. Culture is also diagnostic (blood, sputum, bone marrow, CSF). The yeast form is seen with silver stain on biopsy (bone marrow, lymph node, liver) or bronchoalveolar lavage.
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified. A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up. The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis. The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made (squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging procedure. Staging of any malignancy is important because it determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third esophageal tumor. The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to the liver. Bleeding was the cause of the anemia. Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably friable, and with the passage of digested material across the tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs.
For example, a 45-year-old man presents with a 3-week history of a “flulike” upper respiratory infection (URI) including symptoms of dyspnea and a productive cough. On the basis of the presenting complaints, the clinician uses a “URI assessment form” to improve the quality and efficiency of care by standardizing the information gathered. After quickly acquiring the requisite structured examination components and noting in particular the absence of fever and a clear chest examination, the physician prescribes medication for acute bronchitis and sends the patient home with the reassurance that his illness was not serious. Following a sleepless night with significant dyspnea, the patient develops nausea and vomiting and collapses. He presents to the emergency department in cardiac arrest and is unable to be resuscitated. His autopsy shows a posterior wall myocardial infarction and a fresh thrombus in an atherosclerotic right coronary artery. What went wrong? The clinician had decided, based on the patient’s appearance, even before starting the history, that the patient’s complaints were not serious. Therefore, he felt confident that he could perform an abbreviated and focused examination by using the URI assessment protocol rather than considering the broader range of possibilities and performing appropriate tests to confirm or refute his initial hypotheses. In particular, by concentrating on the URI, the clinician failed to elicit the full dyspnea history, which would have suggested a far more serious disorder, and he neglected to search for other symptoms that could have directed him to the correct diagnosis. Heuristics, also referred to as cognitive shortcuts or rules of thumb, are simplifying decision strategies that ignore part of the data available so as to provide an efficient path to the desired judgment. They are generally part of the intuitive system tools. Two major research programs have come to different conclusions about the value of heuristics in clinical judgment. The “heuristics and biases” program focused on understanding how heuristics in problem solving could be biased by testing the numerical intuition of psychology undergraduates against the rules of statistics. In contrast, the “fast and frugal heuristics” research program explored how and when decision makers’ reliance on simple heuristics can produce good decisions.
The formulation allows for slow-release of bupivacaine for up to 72 hours after injection. Injected directly into the inter-costal spaces immediately prior to chest closure, the formulation has shown great promise in several retrospective reports, with randomized trials not yet completed. One limiting factor in use of the formulation is the cost; future trials are needed, with cost-analysis, to determine whether the benefits in pain, reduction in narcotic use, shorter hospital stay and possibly decreased pul-monary complications justify the cost.Alternatively, intravenous narcotics via patient-controlled analgesia can be used, often in conjunction with ketorolac, gabapentin, and intravenous Tylenol. Dosing must be titrated to balance the degree of pain relief with the degree of seda-tion. Oversedated patients are as ominous as patients without adequate pain control because of the significant risk of secre-tion retention, atelectasis/pneumonia, and pulmonary aspiration, especially in elderly patients who should be carefully assessed for aspiration risk when ordered for dietary advancement. Proper pain control with intravenous narcotics requires a care-fully regulated balance of pain relief and sedation to maximize the benefits of pain control while minimizing these very real and potentially life-threatening complications.Whether on epidural, paravertebral, or intravenous pain control, the patient is typically transitioned to oral pain medica-tion on the third or fourth postoperative day. During both the parenteral and oral phase of pain management, a standardized regimen of stool softeners and laxatives is advisable in order to prevent severe constipation.Respiratory Care. The best respiratory care is achieved when the patient is able to deliver an effective cough to clear secre-tions and results from the commitment and proper training of all involved healthcare providers. The process begins preopera-tively, with clear instructions on using pillows (or other support techniques) over the wound and then applying pressure.Postoperatively, proper pain control without oversedation (as outlined earlier) is essential. Daily morning rounds should include a careful assessment of the patient’s pulmonary status, reminders to the patient and family about the importance of coughing and deep breathing, including use of adjunctive respi-ratory equipment if ordered, and mobilization of the patient. Early transition to a chair and to ambulation is the best respira-tory therapy and should be strongly encouraged. When avail-able, physical and/or cardiopulmonary rehabilitation services are vital additional members of the care team.Postoperative ComplicationsPostoperative complications after pulmonary resection range from minor to life-threatening. Strict attention to volume sta-tus, early and aggressive pulmonary toilet, and good pain control can reduce the risk of most complications, but does not completely eliminate them, even in centers of excellence. The most devastating complication after pulmonary resection is postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema, which occurs in 1% to 5% of patients undergoing pneumonectomy and more often after right compared to left pneumonectomy. Clinically, symp-toms of respiratory distress manifest hours to days after sur-gery.
An excess of car-bohydrate may negatively affect ventilator weaning because of the abnormal RQ due to higher CO2 production and altered pul-monary gas exchange.Although not without risk, tracheostomy decreases the pulmonary dead space and provides for improved pulmonary toilet. When performed before the tenth day of ventilatory sup-port, tracheostomy may decrease the incidence of VAP, the overall length of ventilator time, and the number of ICU patient days.The occurrence of PE is probably underdiagnosed. Its eti-ology is thought to stem from DVT. This concept, however, has recently been questioned by Spaniolas et al.81 The diagno-sis of PE is made when a high degree of clinical suspicion for PE leads to imaging techniques such as ventilation–perfusion nuclear scans or CT pulmonary angiogram. Clinical findings include elevated central venous pressure, hypoxemia, shortness of breath, hypocarbia secondary to tachypnea, and right heart strain on ECG. Ventilation–perfusion nuclear scans are often indeterminate in patients who have an abnormal chest X-ray and are less sensitive than a CT angiogram or pulmonary angio-gram for diagnosing PE. The pulmonary angiogram remains the gold standard for diagnosing PE, but spiral CT angiogram has become an alternative method because of its relative ease of use and reasonable rates of diagnostic accuracy. For cases without clinical contraindications to therapeutic anticoagula-tion, patients should be empirically started on heparin infusion until the imaging studies are completed if the suspicion of a PE is high.Sequential compression devices on the lower extremities and low-dose subcutaneous heparin or low molecular weight heparinoid administration are routinely used to prevent DVT and, by inference, the risk of PE. Neurosurgical and orthopedic patients have higher rates of PE, as do obese patients and those at prolonged bed rest.When anticoagulation is contraindicated, or when a known clot exists in the inferior vena cava (IVC), decreasing the risk for PE includes insertion of an IVC filter. The Greenfield filter has been most widely studied, and it has a failure rate of less than 4%. Newer devices include those with nitinol wire that expands with body temperature and retrievable filters. Retrievable filters, however, must be considered as permanent. In most studies, the actual retrievable rate only reached about 20%. Some studies recognize the benefit of automated reminders and diligence of outlying patient follow-up, where higher retrieval rates have been achieved.82 Patients with spinal cord injury and multiple long-bone or pelvic fractures frequently receive IVC filters, and Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42020/02/19   3:57 PM 421QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12there appears to be a low, but not insignificant, long-term com-plication rate with their use. However, IVC filters do not prevent PEs that originate from DVTs of the upper extremities.Cardiac System.
N Engl J Med 2007;356:2301. Furie B: Do pharmacogenetics have a role in the dosing of vitamin K antagonists? N Engl J Med 2013;369:2345. Kearon C et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: Chest guideline and expert panel report. Chest 2016;149:315. This patient has pulmonary embolism secondary to a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Options for treating this patient include unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin followed by warfarin, with INR goal of 2–3; parenteral anticoagulation for 5–7 days followed by edoxaban; or rivaroxaban, apixaban, or dabigatran alone without monitoring. As this situation can be considered a provoked event given the history of oral contraceptive use, the recommended duration of therapy would be 3–6 months depending on individual risk factors and preferences. The patient should be counseled to use an alternative form of contraception. Mary J. Malloy, MD, & John P. Kane, MD, PhD

A 42-year-old woman has heterozygous familial hyper-cholesterolemia (HeFH) but is otherwise well and has no symptoms of coronary or peripheral vascular disease. A carotid ultrasound was normal. Her mother had a myo-cardial infarction at age 51 and had no known risk factors other than her presumed HeFH. The patient also has ele-vated lipoprotein (a) at 2.5 times normal and low HDL-C (43 mg/dL). She developed muscle symptoms with each of 3 statins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, and simvastatin) so they were discontinued although she did not develop elevated levels of creatine kinase. Her untreated LDL-C is 235 mg/dL and triglycerides 125 mg/dL.
The response to antipyretics does not distinguish bacterial from viral infections. The pattern of fever in children may vary, depending on ageand the nature of the illness. Neonates may not have a febrileresponse and may be hypothermic, despite significant infection,whereas older infants and children younger than 5 years of agemay have an exaggerated febrile response with temperatures ofup to 105° F (40.6° C) in response to either a serious bacterialinfection or an otherwise benign viral infection. Fever to this degree is unusual in older children and adolescents and suggests a serious process. The fever pattern does not reliably distinguish fever caused by infectious microorganisms from that resulting from malignancy, autoimmune diseases, or drugs. Children with fever without a focus present a diagnostic challenge that includes identifying bacteremia and sepsis. Bacteremia, the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream, may be primary or secondary to a focal infection. Sepsis is the systemic response to infection that is manifested by hyperthermia or hypothermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, and shock (see Chapter 40). Children with septicemia and signs of central nervous system dysfunction (irritability, lethargy), cardiovascular impairment (cyanosis, poor perfusion), and disseminated intravascular coagulation (petechiae, ecchymosis) are readily recognized as toxic appearing or septic. Most febrile illnesses in children may be categorized as follows:

Fever of short duration accompanied by localizing signs and symptoms, in which a diagnosis can often be established by clinical history and physical examination

Fever without localizing signs (fever without a focus), frequently occurring in children younger than 3 years of age, in which a history and physical examination fail to establish a cause

Fever of unknown origin (FUO), defined as fever for >14 days without an identified etiology despite history, physical examination, and routine laboratory tests or after 1 week of hospitalization and evaluation

Fever or temperature instability in infants younger than3 months of age is associated with a higher risk of serious bacterial infections than in older infants. These youngerinfants usually exhibit only fever and poor feeding, without localizing signs of infection. Most febrile illnesses inthis age group are caused by common viral pathogens, butserious bacterial infections include bacteremia (caused by group B streptococcus [GBS], Escherichia coli, and Listeria monocytogenes in neonates; and Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, nontyphoidal Salmonella, and Neisseria meningitidis in 1to 3-month-old infants), urinary tract infection (UTI) (E. coli), pneumonia (S. pneumoniae, GBS, or Staphylococcus aureus), meningitis (S. pneumoniae,

H. influenzae type b, GBS, N. meningitidis, herpes simplex virus [HSV], enteroviruses), bacterial diarrhea (Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli), and osteomyelitis or septic arthritis (S. aureus or GBS). Differentiation between viral and bacterial infections in young infants is difficult. Febrile infants <3 months of age who appear ill, especially if follow-up is uncertain, and all febrile infants <4 weeks of age should be admitted to the hospital for empirical antibiotics pending culture results. After blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures are obtained, broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics (typically ampicillin with cefotaxime or gentamicin) are administered.
Hypothermia, particularly temperatures <35°C (<95°F), directly impairs the coagulation pathway, sometimes causing a significant coagulopathy. Rapid rewarming to >35°C (>95°F) significantly decreases the requirement for blood products and produces an improvement in cardiac function. The most effective method for rewarming is endovascular countercurrent warmers through femoral vein cannulation. This process does not require a pump and can rewarm a patient from 30° to 35°C (86° to and tachycardia are cardinal signs of the systemic response. To date, attempts to devise precise definitions for the harmful systemic reaction to infection (“sepsis”) have not resulted in a clinically useful level of specificity, in part because the systemic responses to infection, trauma, and other major stresses can be so similar. In general, when an infectious etiology is proven or strongly suspected and the response results in hypofunction of uninfected organs, the term sepsis (or severe sepsis) should be used. Septic shock refers to sepsis accompanied by hypotension that cannot be corrected by the infusion of fluids. Bacteremia Presence of bacteria in blood, as evidenced by positive blood cultures

Signs of possibly harmful systemic Two or more of the following condi response tions: (1) fever (oral temperature >38°C [>100.4°F]) or hypothermia (<36°C [<96.8°F]); (2) tachypnea (>24 breaths/min); (3) tachycardia (heart rate >90 beats/min); (4) leukocytosis (>12,000/μL), leukopenia (<4000/μL), or >10% bands

Sepsis (or severe sepsis) The harmful host response to infection; systemic response to proven or suspected infection plus some degree of organ hypofunction, i.e. : 1. Cardiovascular: Arterial systolic blood pressure ≤90 mmHg or mean arterial pressure ≤70 mmHg that responds to administration of IV fluid 2. Renal: Urine output <0.5 mL/kg per hour for 1 h despite adequate fluid resuscitation 3. Respiratory: PaO2/FIO2 ≤250 or, if the lung is the only dysfunctional organ, ≤200 4. Hematologic: Platelet count <80,000/μL or 50% decrease in platelet count from highest value recorded over previous 3 days 5. Unexplained metabolic acidosis: A pH ≤7.30 or a base deficit ≥5.0 mEq/L and a plasma lactate level >1.5 times upper limit of normal for reporting lab

Septic shock Sepsis with hypotension (arterial blood pressure <90 mmHg systolic, or 40 mmHg less than patient’s normal blood pressure) for at least 1 h despite adequate fluid resuscitationa

Need for vasopressors to maintain systolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg or mean arterial pressure ≥70 mmHg

Refractory septic shock Septic shock that lasts for >1 h and does not respond to fluid or pressor administration aFluid resuscitation is considered adequate when the pulmonary artery wedge pressure is ≥12 mmHg or the central venous pressure is ≥8 mmHg. The systemic response to any class of microorganism can be harmful.
The child may be slow to arise in the morning and may have a limp. Children may refrain from usual activities and athletics. Enthesitis is inflammation at the insertion of a ligament to a bone. Serositis, inflammation of serosal lining such as pleuritis, pericarditis, or peritonitis, gives rise to chest pain, shortness of breath, or abdominal pain. Myositis,inflammation of the muscle, may lead to symptoms of muscle pain, weakness, or difficulty performing tasks of daily living. Vasculitis, inflammation of the blood vessels, leads to nonspecific symptoms of rash (petechiae, purpura) and edema when small vessels deep in the papillary dermis are involved; involvement of medium-sized vessels results in a circumscribed tender nodule. A thorough history and physical examination is frequently sufficient to narrow the differential diagnosis and elicit the diagnosis. The child’s overall appearance, evidence of growth failure, orfailure to thrive may point to a significant underlying inflammatory disorder. The head and neck examination may showevidence of mucosal ulceration, seen in diseases such as SLE. The eye examination may show pupillary irregularity and synechiae from uveitis or the conjunctivitis of Kawasaki disease.Diffuse lymphadenopathy may be found and is nonspecific. Therespiratory and cardiac examinations may show pericardial orpleural friction rubs, indicating serositis. Splenomegaly or hepatomegaly raises suspicion of activation of the reticuloendothelial system that occurs in systemic-onset JIA or SLE. The joint examination is crucial for the diagnosis of arthritis and may identify evidence of joint swelling, effusion, tenderness, and erythema from increased blood flow. Joint contractures may be seen. The joint lining, or synovium, may be thickened from chronic inflammation.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
Subtypes are listed in Table 2.1-18 along with their etiologies, presentation, diagnosis, and treatment. Aortic aneurysms are most commonly associated with atherosclerosis. Most are abdominal, and > 90% originate below the renal arteries. Usually asymptomatic and discovered incidentally on exam or radiologic study. Risk factors include hypertension, high cholesterol, other vascular disease, a family history, smoking, gender (males > females), and age. Exam demonstrates a pulsatile abdominal mass or abdominal bruits. Ruptured aneurysm leads to hypotension and severe, tearing abdominal pain that radiates to the back. Abdominal ultrasound for diagnosis or to follow an aneurysm over time. CT may be useful to determine the precise anatomy. In asymptomatic patients, monitoring is appropriate for lesions < 5 cm. Surgical repair is indicated if the lesion is > 5.5 cm (abdominal), > 6 cm (thoracic), or smaller but rapidly enlarging. Emergent surgery for symptomatic or ruptured aneurysms. A transverse tear in the intima of a vessel that results in blood entering the media, creating a false lumen and leading to a hematoma that propagates longitudinally. Most commonly 2° to hypertension. The most common sites of origin are above the aortic valve and distal to the left subclavian artery.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
Indications for surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Treatment for acute coronary syndrome. What is metabolic syndrome? Appropriate diagnostic test? A 50-year-old man with angina can exercise to 85% of maximum predicted heart rate. A 65-year-old woman with left bundle branch block and severe osteoarthritis has unstable angina. Target LDL in a patient with diabetes. Signs of active ischemia during stress testing. ECG findings suggesting MI. Coronary territories in MI. A young patient has angina at rest with ST-segment elevation. Cardiac enzymes are normal. Common symptoms associated with silent Mls. The diagnostic test for pulmonary embolism. An agent that reverses the effects of heparin.
In addition, the volumes of contrast agent required to adequately fill large aneurysms can cause sig-nificant renal toxicity. To minimize the risk of contrast nephrop-athy, patients receive periprocedural intravenous (IV) fluids for hydration, mannitol for diuresis, and acetylcysteine.53,54  As with contrast-enhanced CT, surgery is performed ≥1 day after angiography whenever possible to ensure that renal func-tion has stabilized or returned to baseline.TreatmentSelecting the Appropriate Treatment. Once a thoracic aor-tic aneurysm is detected, management begins with patient edu-cation, particularly if the patient is asymptomatic, because aortic disease may progress rapidly and unexpectedly in some patients. A detailed medical history is collected, a physical examination is performed, and a systematic review of medical records is car-ried out to clearly assess the presence or absence of pertinent symptoms and signs, despite any initial denial of symptoms by the patient. Signs of heritable conditions such as Marfan syn-drome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome are thoroughly reviewed. If clinical criteria are met for a heritable condition, confirmatory laboratory tests are conducted. Patients with heritable disorders are best treated in a dedicated aortic clinic where they can be appropriately followed up. Surveillance imaging and aggressive blood pressure control are the mainstays of initial management for asymptomatic patients. When patients become symptomatic or their aneurysms grow to meet certain size criteria, the patients become surgical candidates.Endovascular therapy has become an accepted treatment for descending thoracic aortic aneurysm.55,56 Its role in treating proximal aortic disease and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm remains experimental;55 nonetheless, endoluminal stenting is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of isolated descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, and several different devices have been approved for the treatment of blunt aortic injury and penetrating aortic ulcer. In practice, however, the off-label application of aortic stent grafts is widespread and accounts for well over half their use57; endovascular approaches may be helpful in emergent aneurysm repair, such as for patients with aortic rupture.58 Endovascular therapy has evolved to include hybrid repairs, which combine open “debranching” techniques (to reroute branching vessels) with endovascular aortic repair.59,60 Despite these advances, for the repair of aneurysms with proximal aortic involvement and of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms, open procedures remain the gold standard and preferred approach.Determination of the Extent and Severity of Disease. Cross-sectional imaging with reconstruction is critical when one is evaluating a thoracic aneurysm, determining treatment strategy, and planning necessary procedures. Note that patients with a thoracic aortic aneurysm may also have a second, remote aneurysm.2 In such cases, the more threatening lesion usually is addressed first. In many patients, staged operative procedures are necessary for complete repair of extensive aneurysms involving the ascending aorta, transverse arch, and descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aorta.61 When the descending segment is not disproportionately large (compared with the proximal aorta) and is not causing symptoms, the proximal aortic repair is carried out first. An important benefit of this approach is that it allows treatment of valvular and coronary artery occlusive disease at the first operation.Proximal aneurysms (proximal to the left subclavian artery) usually are addressed via a sternotomy approach. Aneu-rysms involving the descending thoracic aorta are evaluated in terms of criteria (described in the following section) for poten-tial endovascular repair; those unsuitable for an endovascular approach are repaired with open techniques through a left thora-cotomy.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Treat overt hyper-or hypothyroidism. Counsel on risks to pregnancy outcome. Connective Chap. 59, p. 11l38 RA: Counsel on flare risk after pregnancy. Discuss methotrexate and leflunomide tissue disease Chap. 12, p. 241 teratogenicity, as well as possible effects of other immunomodulators. Switch these agents before conception. Stop NSAIDs by 27 weeks' gestation. SLE: Counsel on risks during pregnancy. Optimize disease before conception. Discuss mycophenolate mofetil and cyclophosphamide teratogenicity as well as possible effects of newer immunomodulators. Switch these agents before conception. Psych iatric Cha p. 61, p. 11 75 Depression: Screen for symptoms of depression. Counsel on risks of treatment and disorders of untreated illness and the high risk of exacerbation during pregnancy and the puerperium. Neurological Chap.
1. Gastroesophageal reflux disease—Metoclopramide is available for clinical use in the USA; domperidone is available in many other countries. These agents are sometimes used in the treatment of symptomatic GERD but are not effective in patients with erosive esophagitis. Because of the superior efficacy and safety of antisecretory agents in the treatment of heartburn, prokinetic agents are used mainly in combination with antisecretory agents in patients with regurgitation or refractory heartburn. 2. Impaired gastric emptying—These agents are widely used in the treatment of patients with delayed gastric emptying due to postsurgical disorders (vagotomy, antrectomy) and diabetic gastroparesis. Metoclopramide is sometimes administered in hospitalized patients to promote advancement of nasoenteric feeding tubes from the stomach into the duodenum. 3. Nonulcer dyspepsia—These agents lead to symptomatic improvement in a small number of patients with chronic dyspepsia. 4. Prevention of vomiting—Because of their potent antiemetic action, metoclopramide and domperidone are used for the prevention and treatment of emesis. 5. Postpartum lactation stimulation—Domperidone is sometimes recommended to promote postpartum lactation (see also Adverse Effects). The most common adverse effects of metoclopramide involve the central nervous system. Restlessness, drowsiness, insomnia, anxiety, and agitation occur in 10–20% of patients, especially the elderly.
For many patients, first-generation (eg, haloperidol) and second-generation agents (eg, risperidone) are of equal efficacy for treating positive symptoms. Second generation agents are often more effective for treating negative symptoms and cogni-tive dysfunction and have lower risk of tardive dyskinesia and hyperprolactinemia. Other indications for the use of selected antipsychotics include bipolar disorder, psychotic depression, Tourette syndrome, disturbed behavior in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and in the case of older drugs (eg, chlorpromazine), treatment of emesis, and pruritus. Charles DeBattista, MD house and has no motivation, interest, or energy to pursue recreational activities that she once enjoyed such as hiking. She describes herself as “chronically miserable and worried all the time.” Her medical history is notable for chronic neck pain from a motor vehicle accident for which she is being treated with tramadol and meperidine. In addition, she is on hydrochlorothiazide and propranolol for hypertension. The patient has a history of one depressive episode after a divorce that was treated successfully with fluoxetine. Medical workup including complete blood cell count, thyroid func-tion tests, and a chemistry panel reveals no abnormalities. She is started on fluoxetine for a presumed major depressive episode and referred for cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. What CYP450 and pharmacodynamic interactions might be associated with fluoxetine use in this patient? Which class of antidepressants would be contraindicated in this patient? A 47-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a chief complaint of fatigue. She indicates that she was promoted to senior manager in her company approximately 11 months earlier. Although her promotion was welcome and came with a sizable raise in pay, it resulted in her having to move away from an office and group of colleagues she very much enjoyed. In addition, her level of responsibility increased dramatically.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Vik SA et al: Medication nonadherence and subsequent risk of hospitalisation and mortality among older adults. Drugs Aging 2006;23:345. Wright JT Jr et al: A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2103. This patient has several conditions that warrant careful treat-ment. Hypertension is eminently treatable; the steps described in Chapter 11 are appropriate and effective in the elderly as well as in young patients. Patient education is critical in combating his reluctance to take his medications. Alzheimer’s disease may respond to one of the anticholinesterase agents (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine). Alternatively, memantine may be tried. Unfortunately, age-related macular degeneration (the most likely cause of his visual difficulties) is not readily treated, but the “wet” (neovascular) variety may respond well to one of the drugs currently available (bevacizumab, ranibizumab, pegaptanib). However, these therapies are expensive. Dirk B. Robertson, MD & Howard I. Maibach, MD

A 43-year-old woman presents with a complaint of worsen-ing rosacea. She initially responded to once-daily topical metronidazole 0.75% gel with excellent clearing of the papulopustular component of her acne rosacea. Recently, she has noted increasing persistent facial erythema. What therapeutic options are available?
P. vivax, P. ovale, and

P. malariae can all cause symptoms months to years after initial infection. Obtain a finger stick in a patient with malaria and mental status changes to rule out hypoglycemia. ■Uncomplicated malarial infection can be treated orally, with the choice of medication determined by the Plasmodium strain. Chloroquine has been the standard antimalarial medication, but increasing resistance has led to

A young adult who presents with the triad of fever, sore throat, and lymphadenopathy may have infectious mononucleosis. The lymphocytosis in EBV infection is predominantly due to B-cell proliferation, but the atypical cells are T lymphocytes. the use of other medications, including quinine with clindamycin or doxycycline, atovaquone, mefoquine, artesunate, and halofantrine. The life cycles of P. vivax and P. ovale strains include dormant liver hypnozoite forms, which are resistant to treatment with chloroquine. Thus, in cases of P. vivax, P. ovale, or an unknown strain, primaquine is added to eradicate the hypnozoites in the liver. Severe infections can be treated with parenteral antimalarial medications (IV quinidine) with transition to oral regimens as tolerated. Newer combinations such as proguanil/atovaquone (Malarone) eliminate the need for multiple medications. Symptoms can be treated with supportive care. Cerebral malaria: Headache, change in mental status, neurologic signs, retinal hemorrhages, convulsions, delirium, coma. Severe hemolytic anemia: Usually associated with P. falciparum infection. Acute tubular necrosis and renal failure: Associated with blackwater fever (dark urine due to hemoglobinuria). Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema: Often precipitated by overly rapid re-hydration.
D. Treatment with methotrexate can result in toxic levels of the coenzyme form of folic acid. E. Vitamin B12 is the coenzyme for enzymes catalyzing amino acid deaminations, decarboxylations, and transaminations. Q3. How do hemolytic anemias differ from nutritional anemias? Case 4: Rapid Heart Rate, Headache, and Sweating

Patient Presentation: BE is a 45-year-old woman who presents with concerns about sudden (paroxysmal), intense, brief episodes of headache, sweating (diaphoresis), and a racing heart (palpitations). Focused History: BE reports that the attacks started ~3 weeks ago. They last from 2 to 10 minutes, during which time she feels quite anxious. During the attacks, it feels as though her heart is skipping beats (arrhythmia). At first, she thought the attacks were related to recent stress at work and maybe even menopause. The last time it happened, she was in a pharmacy and had her blood pressure taken. She was told it was 165/110 mm Hg. BE notes that she has lost weight (~8 lbs) in this period even though her appetite has been good. Pertinent Findings: The physical examination was remarkable for BE’s thin, pale appearance. Blood pressure was elevated (150/100 mm Hg), as was the heart rate (110–120 beats/minute). Based on BE’s history, blood levels of normetanephrine and metanephrine were ordered.
In P vivax and P ovale infections, a dormant hepatic stage, the hypnozoite, is not eradicated by most drugs, and relapses can occur after therapy directed against erythrocytic parasites. Eradication of both erythrocytic and hepatic parasites is required to cure these infections. Several classes of antimalarial drugs are available (Table 52–1 and Figure 52–2). Drugs that eliminate developing or dormant liver forms are called tissue schizonticides; those that act on erythrocytic parasites are blood schizonticides; and those that kill sexual stages and prevent transmission to mosquitoes are gametocides. No single available agent can reliably effect a radical cure, ie, eliminate both hepatic and erythrocytic stages. Few available agents are causal prophylactic drugs, ie, capable of preventing erythrocytic infection. However, all effective chemoprophylactic agents kill erythrocytic parasites before they increase sufficiently in number to cause clinical disease. BloodschizonticideTissueschizonticideBloodGametocideLiverSchizontsHypnozoitesFIGURE 52–1 Life cycle of malaria parasites. Only the asexual erythrocytic stage of infection causes clinical malaria. All effective antimalarial treatments are blood schizonticides that kill this stage. (Reproduced from Baird JK: Effectiveness of antimalarial drugs. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1565.) When patients are counseled on the prevention of malaria, it is imperative to emphasize measures to prevent mosquito bites (eg, with insect repellents, insecticides, and bed nets), because parasites are increasingly resistant to multiple drugs and no chemoprophylactic regimen is fully protective. Current recommendations from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) include the use of chloroquine for chemoprophylaxis in the few areas infested by only chloroquine-sensitive malaria parasites (principally Hispaniola and Central America west of the Panama Canal), and mefloquine, Malarone, * or doxycycline for most other malarious areas, with doxycycline preferred for areas with a high prevalence of multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria (principally border areas of Thailand) (Table 52–2). CDC recommendations should be checked regularly (Phone: 770-488-7788; after hours 770-488-7100; Internet: www.cdc.gov/malaria), because these may change in response to changing resistance patterns and increasing experience with new drugs.
Plasma Na+ concentration was initially 129 meq/L, decreasing within 3 days to 118–120 meq/L despite fluid restriction to 1 L/d. A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a right 2.8 × 1.6 cm infrahilar mass and postobstructive pneumonia. The patient was an active smoker. Past medical history was notable for laryngeal carcinoma treated 15 years prior with radiation therapy, renal cell carcinoma, peripheral vascular disease, and hypothyroidism. On review of systems, he denied headache, nausea, and vomiting. He had chronic hip pain, managed with acetaminophen with codeine. Other medications included cilostazol, amoxicillin/clavulanate, digoxin, diltiazem, and thyroxine. He was euvolemic on examination, with no lymphadenopathy and a normal chest examination. Na+ 120 K+ 4.3 Cl− 89 HCO3− 23 BUN 8 Creat 1.0 Glu 93

Alb 3.1 Ca 8.9 Phos 2.8 Mg 2.0 Plasma osm 248 mOsm/kg

Cortisol 25 μg/dL TSH 2.6 Uric acid 2.7 mg/dL

Urine: Na+ 97 K+ 22 Cl− 86 Osm 597

The patient was treated with furosemide, 20 mg PO bid, and salt tablets. The plasma Na+ concentration increased to 129 meq/L with this therapy; however, the patient developed orthostatic hypotension and dizziness. He was started on demeclocycline, 600 mg PO in the morning and 300 mg in the evening, just before discharge from hospital. Plasma Na+ concentration increased to 140 meq/L with a BUN of 23 and creatinine of 1.4, at which point demeclocycline was reduced to 300 mg PO bid. Bronchoscopic biopsy eventually showed small-cell lung cancer; the patient declined chemotherapy and was admitted to hospice. What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options?
PFTs: ↓ FEV1/FVC; normal or ↓ FVC; normal or ↑ TLC (emphysema, asthma); ↓ DLCO (in emphysema). ABGs: Hypoxemia with acute or chronic respiratory acidosis (↑ PCO2). Blood cultures: Obtain if the patient is febrile. Gram stain and sputum culture: Consider in the setting of fever or productive cough, especially if infltrate is seen on CXR. Acute exacerbations: O2, inhaled β-agonists (albuterol) and anticholinergics (ipratropium, tiotropium), IV +/− inhaled corticosteroids, antibiotics. Severe cases may beneft from noninvasive ventilation. Consider intubation in the setting of severe hypoxemia or hypercapnia, impending respiratory fatigue, or changes in mental status. Chronic: Smoking cessation, supplemental O2 (if resting PaO2 is ≤ 55 mmHg or SaO2 is ≤ 89%, or in the setting of cor pulmonale, pulmonary hypertension, a hematocrit > 55%, or nocturnal hypoxia), inhaled β-agonists,

AB F IGU R E 2.1 5-3. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Note the hyperinfated and hyperlucent lungs, f at diaphragms, ↑ AP diameter, narrow mediastinum, and large upper bullae on (A) AP and (B) lateral CXRs. (Reproduced, with permission, from Stobo J et al. The Principles and Practice of Medicine, 23rd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1996: 135.) anticholinergics (tiotropium), systemic or inhaled corticosteroids. Give pneumococcal and ﬂ u vaccines.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Lungs.Thelungsareaffectedinmorethan50%ofcases.Thisinvolvementmaymanifestaspulmonaryhypertensionandinterstitialfibrosis.Pulmonaryvasospasmsecondarytoendothelialdysfunctionisconsideredimportantinthepathogenesisofpulmonaryhypertension.Pulmonaryfibrosis,whenpresent,isindistinguishablefromthatseeninidiopathicpulmonaryfibrosis(Chapter13). Heart. Pericarditiswitheffusion,myocardialfibrosis,andthickeningofintramyocardialarteriolesoccurinonethirdofpatients.Becauseofthechangesinthelung,rightventricularhypertrophyandfailure(corpulmonale)arefrequent. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 5.29 Systemicsclerosis.(A)Normalskin.(B)Skinbiopsyfromapatientwithsystemicsclerosis.Notetheextensivedepositionofdensecollageninthedermis,thevirtualabsenceofappendages(e.g.,hairfollicles),andfociofinflammation(arrow). (C)Theextensivesubcutaneousfibrosishasvirtuallyimmobilizedthefingers,creatingaclawlikeflexiondeformity.Lossofbloodsupplyhasledtocutaneousulcerations. (C,Courtesy of Dr. Richard Sontheimer, Department of Dermatology,University of Texas Southwestern Medical School,Dallas,Texas.) Systemic sclerosis has a female-to-male ratio of 3:1 and a peak incidence in the 50to 60-year age group. Although systemic sclerosis shares features with SLE, rheumatoid arthritis (Chapter 21), and polymyositis (Chapter 22), it is distinguished by the striking cutaneous changes, notably skin thickening. Raynaud phenomenon, caused by episodic vasoconstriction of the arteries and arterioles of the extremities, is seen in virtually all patients and precedes other symptoms in 70% of cases. Progressive collagen deposition in the skin leads to increasing stiffness, especially of the hands, with eventually complete immobilization of the joints. Nailfold capillary loops are distorted early in the disease, and later disappear. Dysphagia attributable to esophageal fibrosis and its resultant hypomotility are present in more than 50% of patients. Eventually, destruction of the esophageal wall leads to atony and dilation, especially at its lower end. Abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, or malabsorption syndrome reflect involvement of the small intestine.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
Candidal thrush. Workup should include an HIV test. Treat with nystatin oral suspension. ≤ 200 for P. jiroveci (with TMP-SMX); ≤ 50–100 for MAI (with clarithromycin/azithromycin). Pregnancy, vesicoureteral reﬂux, anatomic anomalies, indwelling catheters, kidney stones. 7–10 days. Lesion of 1° Lyme disease. Fever, heart murmur, Osler’s nodes, splinter hemorrhages, Janeway lesions, Roth’s spots. Parvovirus B19. Taenia solium (cysticercosis). Name the organism:

Pregnant women with pets

Alcoholic with pneumonia

A 55-year-old man who is a smoker and a heavy drinker presents with a new cough and ﬂulike symptoms. Gram stain shows no organisms; silver stain of sputum shows gram-negative rods. What is the diagnosis? A middle-aged man presents with acute-onset monoarticular joint pain and bilateral Bell’s palsy. What is the likely diagnosis, and how did he get it?
Q1. Based on the findings, which enzyme of the urea cycle is most likely to be deficient in this patient? A. Arginase

B. Argininosuccinate lyase

C. Argininosuccinate synthetase

D. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I

E. Ornithine transcarbamoylase Q2. Why is Arg supplementation helpful in this case? Q3. In individuals with partial (milder) deficiency of urea cycle enzymes, the level of which one of the following would be expected to be decreased during periods of physiologic stress? A. Alanine

B. Ammonia

C. Glutamine

D. Insulin

E. pH

Case 10: Calf Pain

Patient Presentation: CR is a 19-year-old female who is being evaluated for pain and swelling in her right calf. Focused History: Ten days ago, CR had her spleen removed following a bicycle accident in which she fractured her tibial eminence, necessitating immobilization of the right knee. She has had a good recovery from the surgery. CR is no longer taking pain medication but has continued her oral contraceptives (OCP). Pertinent Findings: CR’s right calf is reddish in color (erythematous) and warm to the touch. It is visibly swollen. The left calf is normal in appearance and is without pain. An ultrasound is ordered. Diagnosis: CR has a deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
The most common cause for this pattern is vitamin deficiency, but other causes of combined system degeneration with neuropathy should be considered (e.g., copper deficiency, HIV infection, severe hepatic disease, adrenomyeloneuropathy). 5. What is the Temporal Evolution? It is important to determine the onset, duration, and evolution of symptoms and signs. Does the disease have an acute (days to 4 weeks), subacute (4–8 weeks), or chronic (>8 weeks) course? Is the course monophasic, progressive, or relapsing? Most neuropathies are insidious and slowly progressive in nature. Neuropathies with acute and subacute presentations include GBS, vasculitis, and radiculopathies related to diabetes or Lyme disease. A relapsing course can be present in CIDP and porphyria. 6. Is There Evidence for a Hereditary Neuropathy? In patients with slowly progressive distal weakness over many years with very little in the way of sensory symptoms yet with significant sensory deficits on clinical examination, the clinician should consider a hereditary neuropathy (e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease [CMT]). On examination, the feet may show arch and toe abnormalities (high or flat arches, hammertoes); scoliosis may be present. In suspected cases, it may be necessary to perform both neurologic and electrophysiologic studies on family members in addition to the patient. 7.
B. Arachnodactyly and positive wrist sign. C. High-arched palate. D. Ectopia lentis associated with aortic aneurysm and severe aortic regurgitation in a teenage girl. (Source: V Fuster et al [eds]: Hurst’s The Heart, 11th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2004, www.accessmedicine.com.) See Chap. 427. Figure 436e-22 Ochronotic pigmentation of the femur of a 56-year-old alkaptonuric patient. (Courtesy of Dr. H. W. Edmonds of the Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC; with permission.) See Chap. 434e. Figure 436e-24 Two patients with type B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD). A. A 4.7-year-old patient. (From DS Fredrickson, HR Sloan, in JB Stanbury et al: The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease, 3rd ed.
Some extremely immature infants weighing less than 1000 g at birth may be unable to expand their lungs, even in the absence of other pathology. Their compliant chest walls and surfactant deficiency may result in poor air exchange, retractions, hypoxia, and apnea. The newborn (particularly a preterm infant) responds paradoxically to hypoxia with apnea rather than tachypnea as occurs in adults. Episodes of intrauterine asphyxia also may depress the neonatal central nervous system. If recovery of the fetal heart rate occurs as a result of improved uteroplacental perfusion, fetal hypoxia and acidosis may resolve. Nonetheless, if the effect on the respiratory center is more severe, a newborn may not initiate an adequate ventilatory response at birth and may undergo another episode of asphyxia. The Apgar examination, a rapid scoring system based on physiologic responses to the birth process, is a good method for assessing the need to resuscitate a newborn (Table 58-8).At intervals of 1 minute and 5 minutes after birth, each of the five physiologic parameters is observed or elicited by a qualified examiner. Full-term infants with a normal cardiopulmonary adaptation should score 8 to 9 at 1 and 5 minutes. Apgar scores of 4 to 7 warrant close attention to determine whether the infant’s status will improve and to ascertain whether any pathologic condition is contributing to the low Apgar score. By definition, an Apgar score of 0 to 3 represents either a cardiopulmonary arrest or a condition caused by severe bradycardia, hypoventilation, or central nervous system depression. Most low Apgar scores are caused by difficulty in establishing adequate ventilation and not by primary cardiac pathology. In addition to an Apgar score of 0 to 3, most infants with asphyxia severe enough to cause neurologic injury also manifest fetal acidosis (pH <7); seizures, coma, or hypotonia; and multiorgan dysfunction. Low Apgar scores may be caused by fetal hypoxia or other factors listed in Table 58-7. Most infants with low Apgar scores respond to assisted ventilation by face mask or by endotracheal intubation and usually do not need emergency medication. Resuscitation of a newborn with a low Apgar score follows the same systematic sequence as that for resuscitation of older patients, but in the newborn period this simplified ABCD approach requires some qualification (Fig.
Annu Rev Physiol 41 :383, 1979

Sabol BA, Caughey AB: Acidemia in neonates with a 5-minute Apgar score of7 or greater-what are the outcomes? Am] Obstet GynecoI215(4):486 e481, 2016

Salam A, Mansoor T, Mallick D, et a1: Essential childbirth and postnatal interventions for improved maternal and neonatal health. Reprod Health 11 Suppl 1:53,t2014

Salhab WA, Perlman ]M: Severe fetal acidemia and subsequent neonatal encephalopathy in the larger premature infant. Pediatr Neurol 32(1):25, 2005

Saunders A, Milner AD: Pulmonary pressure/volume relationships during the last phase of delivery and the irst postnatal breaths in human subjects. J Pediatr 93:667, 1978

Schmolzer GM, Dawson ]A, Kamlin CO, et a1: Airway obstruction and gas leak during mask ventilation of preterm infants in the delivery room. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 96(4):F254, 2011

Siew ML, te Pas AB, Wallace M], et al: Positive end-expiratory pressure enhances development of a functional residual capacity in preterm rabbits ventilated from birth.] Appl Physiol (1985)106(5):1487, 2009a

Siew ML, Wallace M], Kitchen M], et al: Inspiration regulates the rate and temporal pattern of lung liquid clearance and lung aeration at birth. ] Appl Physiol (1985)106(6):1888, 2009b

Siggaard-Anderson 0: Blood acid-base alignment nomogram. Scand ] Clin Lab Invest 15:211, 1963

Socol ML, Garcia PM, Riter 5: Depressed Apgar scores, acid-base status, and neurologic outcome. Am] Obstet Gynecol 170:991, 1994

Stang H], Gunnar MR, Snellman L, et al: Local anesthesia for neonatal circumcision: efects on distress and cortisol response. ]AMA 259: 1507, 1)88

Stewart D, Benitz W, AAP Committee on Fetus and Newborn: Umbilical cord care in the newborn infant. Pediatrics 138(3):e20162149, 2016

Taddio A, Stevens B, Craig K, et al: Eicacy and safety of lidocaineprilocaine cream for pain during circumcision. N Engl ] Med 336: 1197, 1997

Teoh D, Reynolds 5: Diagnosis and management of pediatric conjunctivitis. Pediatr Emerg Care 19:48,t2003 te Pas AB, Davis PG, Hooper SB, et a1: From liquid to air: breathing after birth.] Pediatr 152(5):607,t2008

Thongren-]eneck K, Herbst A: Low 5-minute Apgar score: a populationbased register study of 1 million term births.
Most infants with low Apgar scores respond to assisted ventilation by face mask or by endotracheal intubation and usually do not need emergency medication. Resuscitation of a newborn with a low Apgar score follows the same systematic sequence as that for resuscitation of older patients, but in the newborn period this simplified ABCD approach requires some qualification (Fig. 58-2). In the ABCD approach, A stands for securing a patent airway by clearing amniotic fluid or meconium by suctioning; A is also a reminder of anticipation and the need for knowing the events of pregnancy, labor, and delivery. Evidence of a diaphragmatic hernia and a low Apgar score indicate that immediate endotracheal intubation is required. If a mask and bag are used, gas enters the lung and the stomach, and the latter may act as an expanding mass in the chest that compromises respiration. If fetal hydrops has occurred with pleural effusions, bilateral thoracentesis to evacuate the pleural effusions may be needed to establish adequate ventilation. B represents breathing. If the neonate is apneic or hypoventilating and remains cyanotic, artificial ventilation should be initiated. Ventilation should be performed with a well-fitted mask attached to an anesthesia bag and a manometer to prevent extremely high pressures from being given to the newborn; 100% oxygen should be administered through the mask. Yes, stay

Term gestation? Routine care

Breathing or crying? Good tone?  Clear airway if necessary  Dry  Ongoing evaluation

Warm, clear airway if necessary, dry, stimulate

NoHR below 100,30 sec gasping, or apnea? Yes Labored breathing or persistent cyanosis?
However, because the study was carried out in the 1960s, there were inconsistent criteria to accurately assign cause. The contribution of HIE to subsequent neurological disorders is discussed in detail on page 621. The

Preterm delivery at 23-27 weeks 78.9 56.5-110

Breech or face presentation, 3.8 1.6-9.1

Severe birth defect 5.6 8.1n-30.0

Nonsevere birth defect 6.1 3.1-11.8

Time to cry >5 minutes 9.0 4.3-18.8 Obesity 1.2-2 1.1-2.8

Low placental weight 3.6 1.5-8.4

Placental infarction 2.5 1n.2-5.3

Clinical 2.4 1.5-3.8

Histological 1.8 1.2-2.9 alncludes respiratory distress syndrome, meconium aspiration, emergent cesarean or operative vaginal delivery, hypoglycemia, gestational hypertension, hypotension, advanced maternal age, genetic factors, twins, thrombotic states, nighttime delivery, seizures, fetal-growth restriction, male gender, and nulliparity. CI = confidence interval. From Ahlin, 2013; Blair, 2011; Mcintyre, 2013; Moster, 2008; Nelson, 2015; O'Callaghan, 2011; Shatrov, 2010; Takenouchi, 2012; Torfs, 1990; Villamor, 2017; Wu, 2012.

heart tracings have not enhanced predictability (Alirevic, 2017; INFANT Collaborative Group, 2017). Indeed, an abnormal heart rate pattern in fetuses that ultimately develop cerebral palsy may reflect a preexisting neurological abnormality (Phelan, 1994). Because of these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20r17 a,d) has concluded that electronic fetal monitoring does not reduce the incidence of long-term neurological impairment. his is discussed further in Chapter 24 (p. 477). In general, 1-and 5-minute Apgar scores are poor predictors of long-term neurological impairment (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017e). When the 5-minute Apgar score is $3, however, neonatal death or the risk of neurological sequelae rises substantially (Dijxhoorn, 1986; Nelson, 1984). In a Swedish study, 5 percent of such children subsequently required special schooling (Stuart, 2011). In a Norwegian study, the incidence of these low Apgar scores was 0.1 percent in more than 235,000 newborns. lmost a fourth of those with such scores died, and 10 percent of survivors devel oped cerebral palsy (Moster, 2001). Persistence past 5 minutes of these extremely low scores correlates strongly with a higher risk for neurological morbidity and death (Grtinebaum, 2013). his of course is not absolute, and the 2003 Task Force cited a 10-percent risk for cerebral palsy for infants with 10-minute scores of 0 to 3.
If unsure: Ultrasound-guided transabdominal instillation of indigo carmine dye to check for leakage (unequivocal test). Minimize infection risk; do not perform digital vaginal exams on women who are not in labor or for whom labor is not planned immediately. Check fetal heart tracing, maternal temperature, WBC count, and uterine tenderness for evidence of chorioamnionitis. Depends on GA and fetal lung maturity. Term: First check GBS status and fetal presentation; then labor may be induced or the patient can be observed for 24–72 hours. > 34–36 weeks’ gestation: Labor induction may be considered. < 32 weeks’ gestation: Expectant management with bed rest and pelvic rest. Antibiotics: Given to prevent infection and to prolong the latency period in the absence of infection. Antenatal corticosteroids (e.g., betamethasone or dexamethasone × 48 hours): Can be given to promote fetal lung maturity in the absence of intra-amniotic infection prior to 32 weeks’ GA. If signs of infection or fetal distress develop, give antibiotics (ampicillin and gentamicin) and induce labor. Preterm labor and delivery, chorioamnionitis, placental abruption, cord prolapse. Defned as onset of labor between 20 and 37 weeks’ gestation. Occurs in > 10% of all U.S. pregnancies and is the 1° cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Risk factors include multiple gestation, infection, PROM, uterine anomalies, previous preterm labor or delivery, polyhydramnios, placental abruption, poor maternal nutrition, and low SES. Most patients have no identifiable risk factors.
A cluster of petechiae may be seen at pressure points—e.g., where a blood pressure cuff has been inflated. In rapidly progressive meningococcemia (10–20% of cases), the petechial rash quickly becomes purpuric (see Fig. 70-5), and patients develop DIC, multiorgan failure, and shock; 50–60% of these patients die, and survivors often require extensive debridement or amputation of gangrenous extremities. Approach to the Acutely Ill Infected Febrile Patient 782 Hypotension with petechiae for <12 h is associated with significant mortality. Cyanosis, coma, oliguria, metabolic acidosis, and elevated partial thromboplastin time also are associated with a fatal outcome. Correction of protein C deficiency may improve outcome. Antibiotics given in the office by the primary care provider before hospital evaluation and admission may improve prognosis; this observation suggests that early initiation of treatment may be life-saving. Meningococcal conjugate vaccines are protective against serogroups A, C, Y and W135 and are recommended for children 11–18 years of age and for other high-risk patients. Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (See also Chap. 211) RMSF is a tick-borne disease caused by Rickettsia rickettsii that occurs throughout North and South America. Up to 40% of patients do not report a history of a tick bite, but a history of travel or outdoor activity (e.g., camping in tick-infested areas) can often be ascertained. For the first 3 days, headache, fever, malaise, myalgias, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia are documented. By day 3, half of patients have skin findings. Blanching macules develop initially on the wrists and ankles and then spread over the legs and trunk. The lesions become hemorrhagic and are frequently petechial.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
However, the distinctive appearance of an eruption in concert with a clinical syndrome can facilitate a prompt diagnosis and the institution of life-saving therapy or critical infection-control interventions. Representative images of many of the rashes discussed in this chapter are included in Chap. 25e. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

A thorough history of patients with fever and rash includes the following relevant information: immune status, medications taken within the previous month, specific travel history, immunization status, exposure to domestic pets and other animals, history of animal (including arthropod) bites, recent dietary exposures, existence of cardiac abnormalities, presence of prosthetic material, recent exposure to ill individuals, and exposure to sexually transmitted diseases. The history should also include the site of onset of the rash and its direction and rate of spread. A thorough physical examination entails close attention to the rash, with an assessment and precise definition of its salient features. First, it is critical to determine what type of lesions make up the eruption. Macules are flat lesions defined by an area of changed color (i.e., a blanchable erythema). Papules are raised, solid lesions <5 mm in diameter; plaques are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a flat, plateau-like surface; and nodules are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a more rounded configuration. Wheals (urticaria, hives) are papules or plaques that are pale pink and may appear annular (ringlike) as they enlarge; classic (nonvasculitic) wheals are transient, lasting only 24 h in any defined area. Vesicles (<5 mm) and bullae (>5 mm) are circumscribed, elevated lesions containing fluid. Pustules are raised lesions containing purulent exudate; vesicular processes such as varicella or herpes simplex may evolve to pustules. Nonpalpable purpura is a flat lesion that is due to bleeding into the skin. If <3 mm in diameter, the purpuric lesions are termed petechiae; if >3 mm, they are termed ecchymoses. Palpable purpura is a raised lesion that is due to inflammation of the vessel wall (vasculitis) with subsequent hemorrhage.
Duration: Headaches lasting > 72 hours are not migraines. Diurnal variation: Cluster headaches and those from elevated ICP usually occur or worsen at night. Triggers: Examples include chocolate and red wine. Provocative factors: Lying down may make high-ICP headaches worse; standing up may make low-ICP headaches worse. Palliative factors: Sleep clears migraines. Recent-onset headaches warrant immediate workup! If headache is associated with focal neurologic def cits, rule out more serious etiologies with CT or MRI. Rule out SAH with a CT and LP if symptoms are abrupt in onset; then consider other causes typically missed by CT (e.g., dural thrombosis, dissection, or apoplexy). If a 20-year-old female develops headaches after drinking red wine, think migraine. Associated symptoms/signs: Significant findings include fever or rash (consider meningitis or other infectious causes), jaw claudication (specific for temporal arteritis), or constitutional symptoms such as weight loss (associated with neoplastic, inﬂammatory, or infectious conditions). Photophobia, nausea, and vomiting are associated with migraine, aneurysmal SAH, and meningitis, but neck stiffness is more likely to accompany the latter two. Neurologic sequelae: Look for diplopia, mental status changes or associated symptoms (numbness, weakness, dizziness, ataxia, visual disturbances), papilledema, or pupillary abnormalities (partial CN III palsy or Horner’s syndrome). Patient risk factors: High-risk patients are > 50 years of age, immunocompromised, or with preexisting malignancy. If SAH is suspected, obtain a head CT without contrast. If CT is , LP is mandatory.
If fevers persist after 72 hours despite antibiotic therapy, start antifungal treatment. A tick-borne disease caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Usually seen during the summer months, and carried by Ixodes ticks on white-tailed deer and white-footed mice. Endemic to the Northeast, northern Midwest, and Pacif c coast. Hx/PE: Presents with the onset of rash with fever, malaise, fatigue, headache, myalgias, and/or arthralgias. Infection usually occurs after a tick feeds for > 18 hours. ■1° (early localized disease): Erythema migrans begins as a small erythematous macule or papule that is found at the tick-feeding site and expands slowly over days to weeks. The border may be macular or raised, often with central clearing (“bull’s eye”). Fever (≥ 38.3°C) + Neutropenia (< 500 neutrophils/mm3) PO IV (outpatient) Vancomycin not needed Reassess after 3–5 days Vancomycin needed Intermediate/High Risk High-dose chemo? Hematologic malignancy? Neutropenia > 14 days? Combination Therapy: Aminoglycosides + antipseudomonal, penicillin, cefepime, ceftazidime, or carbapenem Vancomycin + cefepime, ceftazidime, or carbapenem ± aminoglycoside Monotherapy: Cefepime, ceftazidine, or carbapenem Ciprofloxacin + amoxicillin/clavulanate (adults only) Low Risk Solid tumors treated as outpatient with conventional chemotherapy? Minimal comorbidity? Neutropenia < 7 days? F IGU R E 2.8-1 3.
Physical findings are often nonspecific.The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis is almost always made endoscopically. Because the rectum is invariably involved, proctoscopy may be adequate to establish the diagnosis. The earliest manifestation is mucosal edema, which results in a loss of the normal vascular pattern. In more advanced disease, char-acteristic findings include mucosal friability and ulceration. Pus and mucus may also be present. While mucosal biopsy is often diagnostic in the chronic phase of ulcerative colitis, biopsy in the acute phase will often reveal only nonspecific inflammation. Evaluation with colonoscopy or barium enema during an acute flare is contraindicated because of the risk of perforation.Barium enema has been used to diagnose chronic ulcer-ative colitis and to determine the extent of disease. However, this modality is less sensitive than colonoscopy and may not detect early disease. In long-standing ulcerative colitis, the colon is foreshortened and lacks haustral markings (“lead pipe” colon). Because the inflammation in ulcerative colitis is purely mucosal, strictures are highly uncommon. Any stricture diag-nosed in a patient with ulcerative colitis must be presumed to be malignant until proven otherwise.Indications for Surgery. Indications for surgery in ulcer-ative colitis may be emergent or elective. Emergency surgery is required for patients with massive life-threatening hemorrhage, toxic megacolon, or fulminant colitis who fail to respond rap-idly to medical therapy. Patients with signs and symptoms of fulminant colitis should be treated aggressively with bowel rest, hydration, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral corticoste-roids. Colonoscopy and barium enema are contraindicated, and antidiarrheal agents should be avoided.
Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Ischemic bowel disease tends to occur in older adults with coexisting cardiac or vascular disease. Acute transmural infarction typically manifests with sudden, severe abdominal pain and tenderness, sometimes accompanied by nausea, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, or grossly melanotic stool. This presentation may progress to shock and vascular collapse within hours as a result of blood loss. Peristaltic sounds diminish or disappear, and muscular spasm creates boardlike rigidity of the abdominal wall. Because these physical signs overlap with those of other abdominal emergencies, including acute appendicitis, perforated ulcer, and acute cholecystitis, the diagnosis of intestinal infarction may be delayed or missed, with disastrous consequences. As the mucosal barrier breaks down, bacteria enter the circulation and sepsis can develop; the mortality rate in these cases may exceed 50%. The overall progression of ischemic enteritis depends on the underlying cause and severity of injury:

Mucosal and mural infarctions by themselves may not be fatal. However, these may progress to more extensive, transmural infarction if the vascular supply is not restored by correction of the insult or, in chronic disease, by development of adequate collateral supplies. Chronic ischemia may masquerade as inflammatory bowel disease, with episodes of bloody diarrhea interspersed with periods of healing. Fig. 15.20 Ischemia.(A)Characteristicattenuatedandpartiallydetachedvillousepitheliuminacutejejunalischemia.Notethehyperchromaticnucleiofproliferatingcryptcells.(B)Chroniccolonicischemiawithatrophicsurfaceepitheliumandfibroticlaminapropria. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection causes ischemic gastrointestinal disease as a consequence of the viral tropism for and infection of endothelial cells. CMV infection can be a complication of immunosuppressive therapy (Chapter 9). Radiation enterocolitis occurs when the gastrointestinal tract is irradiated. In addition to epithelial damage, radiation-induced vascular injury may be significant and produce changes that are similar to ischemic disease.
(Repro duced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 1804.) For partial obstruction, supportive care may be sufficient and should include NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and Foley catheterization to monitor ﬂ uid status. Surgery is required in cases of complete SBO, vascular compromise (necrotic bowel), or symptoms lasting > 3 days without resolution. Exploratory laparotomy may be performed with lysis of adhesions, resection of necrotic bowel, and evaluation for stricture, IBD, and hernias. There is a 2% mortality risk for a nonstrangulated SBO; strangulated SBO is associated with up to a 25% mortality rate depending on the time between diagnosis and treatment. A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern. Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction. Risk factors include recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobility, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, DM, and medications that slow GI motility (e.g., anticholinergics, opioids). Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements. Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds. A rectal exam is required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly patients. Diffusely distended loops of small and large bowel are seen on supine AXR with air-ﬂuid levels on upright view. A Gastrografin study can rule out partial obstruction; CT can rule out neo-In diagnosing ileus, look for plasms.
Ultrasound Med BioI 32(12): 1827, 2006 McCoy JM, Stonecash E, Cournoyer 0, et 1: Epoetin-associated pure red cell aplasia: past, present, and future considerations. Transusion 48(8): 1754,2008

Medof BD, Shepard JO, Smith RN, et al: Case 17-2005: a 22-year-old woman with back and leg pain and respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 352:2425, 2005

Michael M, Elliott EJ, Ridley GF, et al: Interventions for haemolytic uraemic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD003595, 2009

Miller DP, Kaye JA, Shea K, et a1: Incidence of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome. Epidemiology 15:208, 2004

Moake JL: Thrombotic microangiopathies. N Engl J Med 347:589, 2002 .Moake JL: Von Willebrand factor, ADAMTS-13, and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Semin Hematol 41t:4, 2004

Mockenhaupt FP, Mandelkow J, Till H, et a1: Reduced prevalence of PLasmodium aciparum infection and of concomitant anaemia in pregnant women with heterozygous G6PD deiciency. Trop Med Int Health 8: 118, 2003

Moise KJ Jr: Umbilical cord stem cells. Obstet Gynecol 106:1393,2005 Mujica-Coopman MF, Brito A, Lopez de Romana 0, et a1: Prevalence of Anemia in Latin America and the Caribbean. Food Nutr Bull 36(2 Suppl):Sl19,

Murphy JF, O'Riordan J, Newcombe RG, et al: Relation of haemoglobin levels in irst and second trimester to outcome of pregnancy. Lancet 1 :992, 1986 Musclow CE, Goldenberg H, Bernstein EP, et al: Factor XI deiciency presenting as hemarthrosis during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157: 178, 1987

Myers B, Pavorod S, Kean L, et al: Pregnancy outcome in Factor Xl deiciency: incidence of miscarriage, antenatal and postnatal haemorrhage in 33 women with Factor Xl deiciency. BJOG 114:643,t2007

Naderi M, Eshghi P, Cohan N, et al: Successful delivery in patients with FXlII deiciency receiving prophylaxis: report of 17 cases in I ran. Haemophilia 18(5):773,t2012

Nagel RL, Fabry ME, Steinberg MH: he paradox of hemoglobin SC disease. Blood Rev 17(3):16,t,t2003

Nance 0, Josephson NC, Paulyson-Nunez K, et al: Factor X deiciency and pregnancy: preconception counselling and therapeutic options.
Vitamin C is required for the hydroxylation of proline and lysine during collagen synthesis. Severe vitamin C deficiency (scurvy) results in defective connective tissue, characterized by sore and spongy gums, loose teeth, capillary fragility, anemia, and fatigue. 8.6. A 52-year-old woman presents with fatigue of several months’ duration. Blood studies reveal a macrocytic anemia, reduced levels of hemoglobin, elevated levels of homocysteine, and normal levels of methylmalonic acid. Which of the following is most likely deficient in this woman? A. Folic acid

B. Folic acid and vitamin B12

C. Iron

D. Vitamin C

Correct answer = A. Macrocytic anemia is seen with deficiencies of folic acid, vitamin B12, or both. Vitamin B12 is utilized in only two reactions in the body: the remethylation of homocysteine (Hcy) to methionine, which also requires folic acid (as tetrahydrofolate [THF]), and the isomerization of methylmalonyl coenzyme A to succinyl coenzyme A, which does not require THF. The elevated Hcy and normal methylmalonic acid levels in the patient’s blood reflect a deficiency of folic acid as the cause of the macrocytic anemia. Iron deficiency causes microcytic anemia, as can vitamin C deficiency. 8.7. A 10-month-old African American girl, whose family recently located from Maine to Virginia, is being evaluated for the bowed appearance of her legs. The parents report that the baby is still being breastfed and takes no supplements. Radiologic studies confirm the suspicion of rickets caused by vitamin D deficiency. Which one of the following statements concerning vitamin D is correct?
Systemic complaints and weight loss should point to other etiologies of pancytopenia. Prior drug use, chemical exposure, and preceding viral illnesses must often be elicited with repeated questioning. A family history of hematologic diseases or blood abnormalities, of pulmonary or liver fibrosis, or of early hair graying points to a telomeropathy. 666 Physical Examination Petechiae and ecchymoses are typical, and retinal hemorrhages may be present. Pelvic and rectal examinations can often be deferred but, when performed, should be undertaken with great gentleness to avoid trauma; these will often show bleeding from the cervical os and blood in the stool. Pallor of the skin and mucous membranes is common except in the most acute cases or those already transfused. Infection on presentation is unusual but may occur if the patient has been symptomatic for a few weeks. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are highly atypical of aplastic anemia. Café au lait spots and short stature suggest Fanconi anemia; peculiar nails and leukoplakia suggest dyskeratosis congenita; early graying (and use of hair dyes to mask it!) suggests a telomerase defect. LABORATORY STUDIES Blood The smear shows large erythrocytes and a paucity of platelets and granulocytes. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is commonly increased. Reticulocytes are absent or few, and lymphocyte numbers may be normal or reduced. The presence of immature myeloid forms suggests leukemia or MDS; nucleated red blood cells (RBCs) suggest marrow fibrosis or tumor invasion; abnormal platelets suggest either peripheral destruction or MDS. Bone Marrow The bone marrow is usually readily aspirated but dilute on smear, and the fatty biopsy specimen may be grossly pale on withdrawal; a “dry tap” instead suggests fibrosis or myelophthisis.
O'Leary , Boyne , Flett , et l: Longitudinal assessment of changes in reproductive hormones during normal pregnancy. C1in Chen 35(5):667, 1991 53.

bzerol E, bzerol I, Gokdeniz R, et al: Efect of smoking on serum concentrations of total homocysteine, folate, vitamin B12, and nitric oxide in pregnancy: a preliminary study. Fetal Diagn Ther 19:145,t2004 54. Parente ]V, Franco ]G, Greene L], et al: Angiotensin-converting enzyme: serum levels during normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet GynecoI135:586, 1979 55. Piechota W, Staszewski A: Reference ranges of lipids and apolipoproteins in pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod BioI 45:27, 1992 56. Pitkin RM, Gebhardt MP: Serum calcium concentrations in human pregnanc),. Amt] Obstet Gynecol 127:775, 19 57. Price A, Obel 0, Cresswell J, et al: Comparison of thyroid function in pregnant and non-pregnant Asian and western Caucasian women. Clin Chim Acta 208:91,t2001 58. Qvist I, Abdulla M, Jagerstad M, et al: Iron, zinc and folate status during pregnancy and two months ater delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 65:15,t1986 59. Radder JK, Van Roosmalen J: HbAlc in healthy, pregnant women. Neth J Med 63:256, 2005 60.
Approximately 20 percent of pregnant women admitted to Parkland Hospital for pneumonia require this level of care (Zeeman, 2003). Severe pneumo

TABLE 51-3. Criteria for Severe Community-Acquired Pneumoniaa

Leukopenia: WBC <4000/-LL

Thrombocytopenia-platelets < 1 OO,OOO/-LL aCriteria of the Infectious Diseases Society of America/

American Thoracic Society. Pao/Fio2 = partial pressure oxygen in arterial blood/ fraction of inspired oxygen; WBC = white blood cell. Adapted from Mandell, 2007.

nia is a relatively common cause of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) during pregnancy, and mechanical ventilation may become necessary (Chap. 47, p. 919). Indeed, of the 51 gravidas who required mechanical ventilation in the review by Jenkins and coworkers (2003), 12 percent had pneumonia. Initial antimicrobial and antiviral treatment is empirical (Mandell, 2015). Because most adult bacterial pneumonias are caused by pneumococci, mycoplasma, or chlamydophila, monotherapy initially is with a macrolide-azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin (Table 51-4). Yost and colleagues (2000) reported that erythromycin mono therapy, given IV and then orally, was efective in all but one of 99 pregnant women with uncomplicated pneumonia. During inluenza season, we routinely administer oseltamivir treatment along with empirical therapy for bacterial pneumonia. For women with severe disease according to criteria in Table 51-3, Mandell and associates (2007) summarized IDSAI ATS guidelines, which call for either: (1) a respiratory luoroquinolone-Ievofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or gemiloxacin; or (2) a macrolide plus a preferred �-lactam-either high-dose amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanate. �-Lactam alternatives include ceftriaxone, cefpodoxime, or cefuroxime (see Table 51-4). In areas in which the resistance of pneumococcal isolates to macrolides is great, these latter regimens are preferred. he teratogenicity risk of luoroquinolones is low, and these should be given if indicated (Briggs, 2015).
A. influenza a virus

B. Herpes simplex virus-1

C. Cytomegalovirus

D. Trypanosoma brucei

E. Plasmodium falciparum

F. Hepatitis B virus 13.11 Human immunodeficiency virus (HiV) produces various immunoevasins. One of these, nef, is exceptionally pleiotropic and a major target of CD8+ t-cell responses. Which of the following is not one of the functions of nef? A. inhibition of the restriction factor SaMHD1

B. MHC class i downregulation

General references. Alcami, A., and Koszinowski, U.H. : Viral mechanisms of immune evasion. Immunol. Today 2000, 21:447–455. De Cock, K.M., Mbori-Ngacha, D., and Marum, E.: Shadow on the continent: public health and HIV/AIDS in Africa in the 21st century. Lancet 2002, 360:67–72. Finlay, B.B., and McFadden, G.: Anti-immunology: evasion of the host immune system by bacterial and viral pathogens. Cell 2006, 124:767–782. Hill, A.V. : The immunogenetics of human infectious diseases.
Biol. 8, 489–500. popot J-l (2010) Amphipols, nanodiscs, and fluorinated surfactants: three nonconventional approaches to studying membrane proteins in aqueous solution. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79, 737–775. prinz WA & hinshaw Je (2009) Membrane-bending proteins. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 44, 278–291. rao M & Mayor S (2014) Active organization of membrane constituents in living cells.
Because the http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 5.37 Thestructureofthehumanimmunodeficiencyvirus(HIV)-1virion.Theviralparticleiscoveredbyalipidbilayerderivedfromthehostcellandstuddedwithviralglycoproteinsgp41andgp120.gp120 Lipid bilayer p24 capsid Protease Integrase RNA Reverse transcriptase antibody response against HIV-1 is targeted against its envelope, such variability poses problems for the development of a single-antigen vaccine. Based on genetic variation, HIV-1 can be divided into three subgroups, designated M (major), O (outlier), and N (neither M nor O). Group M viruses are the most common form worldwide, and they are further divided into several subtypes, or clades, designated A through K. Various subtypes differ in their geographic distribution; for example, subtype B is the most common form in western Europe and the United States, whereas subtype E is the most common clade in Thailand. Currently, clade C is the fastest spreading clade worldwide, being present in India, Ethiopia, and Southern Africa. While HIV can infect many tissues, the two major targets of HIV infection are the immune system and the central nervous system. The effects of HIV infection on each of these two systems are discussed separately. Profound immune deficiency, primarily affecting cell-mediated immunity, is the hallmark of AIDS. This results chiefly from infection and subsequent loss of CD4+ T cells as well as impaired function of surviving helper T cells and other immune cells. We first describe the mechanisms involved in viral entry into T cells and macrophages and the replicative cycle of the virus within cells. This is followed by a more detailed review of the interaction between HIV and its cellular targets. Life Cycle of HIV

The life cycle of HIV consists of infection of cells, integration of the provirus into the host cell genome, activation of viral replication, and production and release of infectious virus (

Fig. 5.38 ). The molecules and mechanisms of each of these steps are understood in considerable detail. HIV infects cells by using the CD4 molecule as a receptor and various chemokine receptors as coreceptors (see

Fig.
Correct answer = D. Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC or, dipalmitoyl lecithin) is the lung surfactant found in mature, healthy lungs. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) can occur in lungs that make too little of this compound. If the lecithin/sphingomyelin (L/S) ratio in amniotic fluid is ≥2, a newborn’s lungs are considered to be sufficiently mature (premature lungs would be expected to have a ratio <2). The RDS would not be due to too few type II pneumocytes, which would simply be secreting sphingomyelin rather than DPPC at 28 weeks’ gestation. The mother is given a glucocorticoid, not surfactant, prior to giving birth (antenatally). Surfactant would be administered to the baby postnatally to reduce surface tension. 7.3. A 10-year-old boy was evaluated for burning sensations in his feet and clusters of small, red-purple spots on his skin. Laboratory studies revealed protein in his urine. Enzymatic analysis revealed a deficiency of αgalactosidase, and enzyme replacement therapy was recommended. The most likely diagnosis is:

A. Fabry disease. B. Farber disease. C. Gaucher disease. D. Krabbe disease. E. Niemann-Pick disease.
First, specific inhibitor proteins in the blood or on the surface of host cells terminate the cascade, by either binding or cleaving certain complement components once the components have been activated by proteolytic cleavage. Second, many of the activated components in the cascade are unstable; unless they bind immediately to either the next component in the complement cascade or to a nearby membrane, they rapidly inactivate. Virus-Infected cells Take Drastic Measures to prevent Viral replication

Because host-cell ribosomes make a virus’s proteins and host-cell lipids form the membranes of enveloped viruses, PAMPs are generally not present on the surface of viruses. Therefore, the only general way that a host cell PRR can recognize the presence of a virus is to detect unusual elements of the viral genome, such as the

Figure 24–8 Assembly of the late complement components to form a membrane attack complex. The cleavage of the early complement components (shown within gray arrows in Figure 24–7) results in the formation of c3bcontaining proteolytic complexes called c5 convertases (not shown). These then cleave the first of the late components, c5, to produce c5a and c5b. As illustrated, c5b rapidly assembles with c6 and c7 to form c567, which then binds firmly via c7 to the membrane. One molecule of c8 binds to the complex to form c5678. The binding of a molecule of c9 to c5678 induces a conformational change in c9 that exposes a hydrophobic region and causes c9 to insert into the lipid bilayer of the target membrane. This starts a chain reaction in which the altered c9 binds a second molecule of c9, which can then bind another molecule of c9, and so on. In this way, a ring of c9 molecules forms a large transmembrane channel in the membrane. double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) that is an intermediate in the life cycle of many viruses and is recognized by several PRRs including the Toll-like receptor TLR3; in addition, DNA virus genomes frequently contain significant amounts of the CpG motifs discussed earlier, which can be recognized by TLR9 (see Table 24–1, p. 1300). Mammalian cells are particularly adept at recognizing the presence of dsRNA, which activates intracellular PRRs that induce the host cell to produce and secrete two antiviral cytokines—interferon-α (IFNα) and interferon-β (IFNβ). These interferons are referred to as type I interferons to distinguish them from IFNγ, which is a type II interferon and has different functions, as we discuss later. Type I interferons act in both an autocrine fashion on the infected cells that produced it and a paracrine fashion on uninfected neighbors.
The use of these examinations is described in Chap. 20. Beyond PET and related imaging studies there are no established biologic markers of Alzheimer disease with the possible exception of the ratio of tau to Aβ 42 (tau-amyloid ratio) in the cerebrospinal fluid (the ratio is low in Alzheimer disease). This test is used in some clinics and in clinical trials (Maddalena et al). Schoonenboom and colleagues have shown that the incorporation of CSF phosphorylated tau (p-tau) with the typical CSF amyloid/tau ratio may provide additional specificity in distinguishing Alzheimer from other dementing diseases. Differential Diagnosis of Alzheimer Disease (See Also Table 20-3)

Formerly, when virtually all forms of dementia were untreatable, there was little advantage to either the patient or the family in ascertaining the cause of the cerebral disease. There are now adequate treatments for a number of diseases and conditions that cause cognitive decline, putting a premium on proper diagnosis. The currently potentially treatable forms of dementia are those caused by normal-pressure hydrocephalus; chronic subdural hematoma; the dementia of HIV paraneoplastic and related autoimmune encephalitis; nutritional deficiencies (thiamine—Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, Marchiafava-Bignami disease, pellagra, vitamin B12 deficiency); chronic intoxication (e.g., alcohol, sedatives); multiple cerebral infarctions; certain endocrine and metabolic disorders (myxedema, Hashimoto encephalopathy), neurosyphilis and other chronic meningitides, Cushing disease, chronic hepatic encephalopathy; frontal and temporal lobe tumors; vascular dementia, cerebral vasculitis; sarcoidosis; progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), Whipple disease; multiple sclerosis; and sometimes neglected, the pseudodementia of depression. Exclusion of most of these diseases is readily accomplished by careful history, sequential clinical evaluations, and testing of blood and CSF, CT, MRI, and neuropsychologic testing. We have incorporated the results of metabolic brain imaging (both FDG-PET and amyloid-ligand imaging) as well as CSF amyloid-tau ratio into practice when feasible. In exceptional situations, brain biopsy may be justified in the diagnosis of dementia, almost limited to rapidly progressive cases. A perspective, albeit from a sample in the past that cannot be generalized to practice, has been given by Warren and colleagues of 90 consecutive brain biopsies performed between 1989 and 2003 for the evaluation of dementia. More than half provided a diagnosis, mostly Alzheimer, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and inflammatory disorders. However, reasonable assurances must be given to the neurosurgeon that prion disease is unlikely. A special problem in differential diagnosis is the distinction between a late-life depression and a dementia, especially when some degree of both is present.
For patients who cannot finish the written portion because of physical disability, the test can be scored with 25 as the maximum and proportionately converted to 30. Several versions of the MoCA are available for use to avoid a learning effect if testing is done at 3 month intervals or less. Patients with mid cognitive impairment usually score in the range of 19 to 25 and those with confirmed Alzheimer disease, below 22. A number of other tests that measure the degree of dementia (usually carrying the names of their originators: Roth, Pfeiffer, Blessed, Mattis) rely essentially on the points mentioned previously and a brief assessment of the patient’s ability to accomplish the activities of daily living, which is lost in the later stages of disease. For serial measurement specifically for those with Alzheimer disease, a number of systems have been devised as reviewed in Chap. 38. Among the most commonly used is the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog). It is more comprehensive than the others and takes longer to administer. Probably the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) is also accurate in detecting dementia. In this test, an index of deterioration is provided by the discrepancy between the vocabulary, picture-completion, and object-assembly tests as a group (these correlate well with premorbid intelligence and are relatively insensitive to dementing brain disease) and other measures of general performance, namely arithmetic, block design, digit-span, and digit-symbol tests. The Wechsler Memory Scale estimates the degree of memory failure and can be used to distinguish the amnesic state from a more general dementia (discrepancy of more than 25 points between the WAIS and the memory scale). Questions that measure spatial and temporal orientation and memory are the key items in most of these abbreviated scales of dementia. All of the aforementioned clinical and psychologic tests, and several others as well, measure the same aspects of behavior and intellectual function. The WAIS, MOCA, and the MMSE of Folstein and associates are the most widely used clinically in our experience and serve the clinician well. Dementia is a clinical state of the most serious nature.
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is associated with unexplained falls, axial rigidity, dysphagia, and vertical gaze deficits. CJD is suggested by the presence of diffuse rigidity, an akinetic-mute state, and prominent, often startle-sensitive myoclonus. Hemiparesis or other focal neurologic deficits suggest vascular dementia or brain tumor. Dementia with a myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy suggests vitamin B12 deficiency. Peripheral neuropathy could also indicate another vitamin deficiency, heavy metal intoxication, thyroid dysfunction, Lyme disease, or vasculitis. Dry, cool skin, hair loss, and bradycardia suggest hypothyroidism. Fluctuating confusion associated with repetitive stereotyped movements may indicate ongoing limbic, temporal, or frontal seizures. In the elderly, hearing impairment or visual loss may produce confusion and disorientation misinterpreted as dementia. Profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in a younger patient with short stature or myopathy, however, should raise concern for a mitochondrial disorder. Brief screening tools such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA), and Cognistat can be used to capture dementia and follow progression. None of these tests is highly sensitive to early-stage dementia or discriminates between dementia syndromes. The MMSE is a 30 point test of cognitive function, with each correct answer being scored as 1 point. It includes tests in the areas of: orientation (e.g., identify season/date/month/year/floor/hospital/town/state/ country); registration (e.g., name and restate 3 objects); recall (e.g., remember the same three objects 5 minutes later); and language (e.g., name pencil and watch; repeat “no if ’s and’s or but’s”; follow a 3-step command; obey a written command; and write a sentence and copy a design). In most patients with MCI and some with clinically apparent AD, bedside screening tests may be normal, and a more challenging and comprehensive set of neuropsychological tests will be required. When the etiology for the dementia syndrome remains in doubt, a specially tailored evaluation should be performed that includes tasks of working and episodic memory, executive function, language, and visuospatial and perceptual abilities.
It could be pointed out to the patient that some individuals are rather forgetful or have difficulty in concentrating, or that it is necessary to ask specific questions in order to form some impression about his degree of nervousness when being examined. Reassurance that these are not tests of intelligence or of sanity is helpful. If the patient is agitated, suspicious, or belligerent, intellectual functions must be inferred from his remarks and from information supplied by the family. This type of mental status survey can be accomplished in about 10 min. A high level of performance on all tests eliminates the possibility of dementia in almost all cases and accords well with scores on the more formal paper and pencil tests mentioned earlier. It may fail to identify a dementing disease in an uncooperative patient and in a highly intelligent individual in the earliest stages of disease. The question of whether to resort to formal psychologic tests is certain to arise. Such tests yield quantitative data of comparative value but perhaps may be less valuable for diagnostic purposes. The Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) devised by Folstein and coworkers, and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) (Fig. 20-3) are popularly used. A score above 24/30 on the “mini-mental” is considered normal and scores below 21 indicate cognitive impairment (but in our practices, most educated adults in an office setting can exceed a score of 25). Patients with lower levels of education and older age have lower normative scores, but even individuals in their eighties with a high school education score 23 or above if not demented (see Crum et al for age and education adjusted normal score). The MoCA has been validated for adults ages 55 to 85 and also has a maximum score of 30. For patients who cannot finish the written portion because of physical disability, the test can be scored with 25 as the maximum and proportionately converted to 30. Several versions of the MoCA are available for use to avoid a learning effect if testing is done at 3 month intervals or less.
There are also extremely rare causative

Alzheimer’s disease genes. Individuals with Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21) develop Alz- heimer’s disease if they survive to midlife. Multiple vascular risk factors influence risk for direct effects on Alzheimer pathology. Detection of an NCD may be more difficult in cultural and socioeconomic settings where memory loss is considered normal in old age, where older adults face fewer cognitive de- mands in everyday life, or where very low educational levels pose greater challenges to objective cognitive assessment. Cortical atrophy, amyloid-predominant neuritic plaques, and tau-predominant neurofibril— lary tangles are hallmarks of the pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and may be continued via postmortem histopathological examination. For early-onset cases with auto- somal dominant inheritance, a mutation in one of the known causative Alzheimer’s disease genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSENl), or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)— may be involved, and genetic testing for such mutations is commercially available, at least for PSEN1. Apolipoprotein E4 cannot serve as a diagnostic marker because it is only a risk factor and neither necessary nor sufficient for disease occurrence. Since amyloid beta-42 deposition in the brain occurs early in the pathophysiological cascade, amyloid-based diagnostic tests such as amyloid imaging on brain positron emis- sion tomography (PET) scans and reduced levels of amyloid beta—42 in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) may have diagnostic value. Signs of neuronal injury, such as hippocampal and temporoparietal cortical atrophy on a magnetic resonance image scan, temporoparietal hypometabolism on a ﬂuorodeoxyglucose PET scan, and evidence for elevated total tau and phospho—tau levels in CSF, provide evidence of neuronal damage but are less specific for Alzheimer’s disease. At present, these biomarkers are not fully validated, and many are available only in tertiary care settings. However, some of them, along with novel bio- markers, will likely move into wider clinical practice in the coming years. Functional Consequences of Major or Mild

Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s Disease

The prominence of memory loss can cause significant difficulties relatively early in the course. Social cognition (and thus social functioning) and procedural memory (e.g., danc- ing, playing musical instruments) may be relatively preserved for extended periods. Other neurocognitive disorders. Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenera- tive processes (e.g., Lewy body disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration) share the in- features of their own.
In the presence of active bleeding, treatment is excision of the diverticulum together with the adjacent ileal segment (ulcers frequently develop in adjacent ileum). If the condition is asymptomatic but discovered intraoperatively, treatment is controversial but often involves excision. Congenital lack of ganglion cells in the distal colon, leading to uncoordinated peristalsis and ↓ motility. Associated with male gender, Down syndrome, Waardenburg’s syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2. Neonates present with failure to pass meconium within 48 hours of birth, accompanied by bilious vomiting and FTT; children with less severe lesions may present later in life with chronic constipation. Physical exam may reveal abdominal distention and explosive discharge of stool following rectal exam. Barium enema is the imaging study of choice and reveals a narrowed distal colon with proximal dilation. Plain films reveal distended bowel loops with a paucity of air in the rectum. Anorectal manometry detects a failure of the internal sphincter to relax after distention of the rectal lumen. It is typically used in atypical presentations or older children. Full-thickness rectal biopsy confirms the diagnosis and reveals absence of the myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus and submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus along with hypertrophied nerve trunks enhanced with acetylcholinesterase stain. Traditionally a two-stage surgical repair is used involving the creation of a diverting colostomy at the time of diagnosis, followed several weeks later by a definitive “pull-through” procedure connecting the remaining colon to the rectum. Malrotation with Volvulus

Congenital malrotation of the midgut results in abnormal positioning of the small intestine (cecum in the right hypochondrium) and formation of fibrous bands (Ladd’s bands). Bands predispose to obstruction and constriction of blood ﬂ ow. Often presents in the newborn period with bilious emesis, crampy abdominal pain, distention, and the passage of blood or mucus in stool.
Bands predispose to obstruction and constriction of blood ﬂ ow. Often presents in the newborn period with bilious emesis, crampy abdominal pain, distention, and the passage of blood or mucus in stool. Postsurgical adhesions can lead to obstruction and volvulus at any point in life. The def nitive diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease requires a full-thickness rectal biopsy. Pneumatosis intestinalis on plain f lms is pathognomonic for necrotizing enterocolitis in neonates. AXR may reveal the absence of intestinal gas but may also be normal. If the patient is stable, an upper GI is the study of choice and shows an abnormal location of the ligament of Treitz. Ultrasound may be used, but sensitivity is determined by the experience of the ultrasonographer. NG tube insertion to decompress the intestine. IV ﬂ uid hydration. Surgical repair (emergent when volvulus is present). A condition in which a portion of the bowel undergoes necrosis. The most common GI emergency in neonates; most commonly occurs in premature infants but can occur in full-term infants as well. Symptoms are nonspecific and include feeding intolerance, delayed gastric emptying, abdominal distention, and bloody stools. Symptoms may rapidly progress to intestinal perforation, peritonitis, abdominal erythema, and shock.
Associated with Down syndrome

B. Due to congenital failure of ganglion cells (neural crest-derived) to descend into myenteric and submucosal plexus 1. Myenteric (Auerbach) plexus is located between the inner circular and outer longitudinal muscle layers of the muscularis propria and regulates motility. 2. Submucosal (Meissner) plexus is located in the submucosa and regulates blood flow, secretions, and absorption. C. Clinical features are based on obstruction. 1. Failure to pass meconium 2. 3. Massive dilatation (megacolon) of bowel proximal to obstruction with risk for rupture

D. Rectal suction biopsy reveals lack of ganglion cells. E. Treatment involves resection of the involved bowel; ganglion cells are present in the bowel proximal to the diseased segment. Table 10.1: Main Features of Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn Disease

Begins in rectum and can extend proximally up to the cecum (involvement is continuous, Fig. 10.21A); remainder of the GI tract is unaffected. Left lower quadrant pain (rectum) with bloody diarrhea

Crypt abscesses with neutrophils (Fig. 10.21B)

Pseudopolyps; loss ofhaustra ('lead pipe' sign on imaging, Fig.
May have 2 types of epithelia (gastric/ pancreatic). Congenital megacolon characterized by lack of ganglion cells/enteric nervous plexuses (Auerbach and Meissner plexuses) in distal segment of colon. Due to failure of neural crest cell migration. Associated with loss of function mutations in RET. Presents with bilious emesis, abdominal distention, and failure to pass meconium within 48 hours • chronic constipation. Normal portion of the colon proximal to the aganglionic segment is dilated, resulting in a “transition zone.”

Risk  with Down syndrome. Explosive expulsion of feces (squirt sign)  empty rectum on digital exam. Diagnosed by absence of ganglionic cells on rectal suction biopsy. Treatment: resection. RET mutation in the REcTum. Malrotation Anomaly of midgut rotation during fetal development  improper positioning of bowel (small bowel clumped on the right side) A , formation of fibrous bands (Ladd bands). Can lead to volvulus, duodenal obstruction. Volvulus Twisting of portion of bowel around its mesentery; can lead to obstruction and infarction. Can occur throughout the GI tract. Chronic mesenteric “Intestinal angina”: atherosclerosis of celiac artery, SMA, or IMA  intestinal hypoperfusion ischemia • postprandial epigastric pain  food aversion and weight loss.
A deep rectal biopsy specimen obtained surgically or by using a suction biopsy instrument is required for diagnosis. When no ganglion cells areshown in the submucosal plexus, accompanied by nerve trunk hyperplasia, the diagnosis is certain. Barium enema and anorectal manometry may be used before biopsy, butfalse-negative and false-positive results can occur. Therapy is surgical. When the bowel is markedly distended orinflamed, an initial colostomy usually is performed abovethe aganglionic segment, followed weeks later by one of several definitive repair procedures. The transanal pull-throughexcises the aganglionic bowel and creates a primary colorectal anastomosis without laparotomy. This procedure can beconsidered in patients with uncomplicated involvement limited to the rectosigmoid region. Meckel diverticulum is a remnant of the fetal omphalomesenteric duct and is an outpouching of the distal ileumpresent in 1% to 2% of the population. Although most diverticula are asymptomatic throughout life, some cause massive, painless GI bleeding. Ectopic gastric tissue within thediverticulum causes ulceration of mucosa in the adjacentileum. Meckel diverticulum may be a lead point for intussusception or may enable twisting (volvulus) of neighboring bowel around its vascular supply. Diverticulitis mimicsappendicitis. Diagnosis may be made in most cases by technetium scan (Meckel scan), which labels the acid-producingmucosa. Because not all diverticula are seen, ultrasound, barium enteroclysis, or video capsule endoscopy may beuseful. When the level of suspicion is high, surgical or laparoscopic investigation is warranted.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
Bradbury S, Eggleston C: Postural hypotension: A report of three cases. Am Heart J 1:73, 1925. Brindley GS, Polkey CE, Rushton DN, Cardozo L: Sacral anterior root stimulation for bladder control in paraplegia: The first 50 cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 49:1104, 1986. Burnstock G: Innervation of vascular smooth muscle: Histochemistry and electron microscopy. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2(Suppl):2, 1975. Caird FI, Andrews GR, Kennedy RD: Effect of posture on blood pressure in the elderly. Br Heart J 35:527, 1973. Camilleri M: Diabetic gastroparesis. New Eng J Med 356:820, 2007. Cannon WB: Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, 2nd ed. New York, Appleton, 1920. Carmel PW: Sympathetic deficits following thalamotomy. Arch Neurol 18:378, 1968. Chen Z, Eldridge FL, Wagner PG: Respiratory-associated thalamic activity is related to level of respiratory drive.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
Similarly the dissection can impair blood flow to the kidneys, which decreases their ability to function. The patient underwent emergency surgery and survived. Interestingly, the height of the patient and the previous lens surgery would suggest a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome, and a series of blood tests and review of the family history revealed this was so. A 35-year-old male patient presented to his family practitioner because of recent weight loss (14 lb over the previous 2 months). He also complained of a cough with streaks of blood in the sputum (hemoptysis) and left-sided chest pain. Recently, he noticed significant sweating, especially at night, which necessitated changing his sheets. On examination the patient had a low-grade temperature and was tachypneic (breathing fast). There was reduced expansion of the left side of the chest. When the chest was percussed it was noted that the anterior aspect of the left chest was dull, compared to the resonant percussion note of the remainder of the chest. Auscultation (listening with a stethoscope) revealed decreased breath sounds, which were hoarse in nature (bronchial breathing). A diagnosis of chest infection was made. Chest infection is a common disease. In most patients the infection affects the large airways and bronchi. If the infection continues, exudates and transudates are produced, filling the alveoli and the secondary pulmonary lobules. The diffuse patchy nature of this type of infection is termed bronchial pneumonia.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Risk factors (age, prior fracture, family history of hip fracture, low body weight, cigarette consumption, excessive alcohol use, steroid use, and rheumatoid arthritis) can be combined with BMD to assess the likelihood of a

Consider BMD testing in the following individuals: • Women age 65 and older and men age 70 and older, regardless of clinical • Younger postmenopausal women, women in the menopausal transition and men age 50–69 with clinical risk factors for fracture

Adults with a condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) or taking a medication (e.g., glucocorticoids in a daily dose ≥5 mg prednisone or equivalent for ≥3 months) associated with low bone mass or bone loss

Source: From the 2014 National Osteoporosis Foundation Clinician’s Guide to the Prevention and Treatment of Osteoporosis. © National Osteoporosis Foundation. 2494 fracture over a 5or 10-year period. Treatment threshold depends on cost-effectiveness analyses but probably is ~1% per year of risk in the United States. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The perimenopausal transition is a good opportunity to initiate a discussion about risk factors for osteoporosis and consideration of indications for a BMD test. A careful history and physical examination should be performed to identify risk factors for osteoporosis. A low Z-score increases the suspicion of a secondary disease. Height loss >2.5–3.8 cm (>1–1.5 in.) is an indication for VFA by DXA or radiography to rule out asymptomatic vertebral fractures, as is the presence of significant kyphosis or back pain, particularly if it began after menopause. In appropriate individuals, screening BMD and screening vertebral imaging should be recommended as above, even in the absence of any specific risk factors (Table 425-3). For patients who present with fractures, it is important to ensure that the fractures are not caused by an underlying malignancy. Usually this is clear on routine radiography, but on occasion, CT, MRI, or radionuclide scans may be necessary. There is no established algorithm for the evaluation of women who present with osteoporosis. A general evaluation that includes complete blood count, serum and 24-h urine calcium, renal and hepatic function tests, and a 25(OH)D level is useful for identifying selected secondary causes of low bone mass, particularly for women with fractures or very low Z-scores. An elevated serum calcium level suggests hyperparathyroidism or malignancy, whereas a reduced serum calcium level may reflect malnutrition and osteomalacia.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
In victims of blunt trauma, CT scans of the chest, abdomen, or pelvis can be reformatted to detect associated vertebral fractures. METABOLIC CAuSES Osteoporosis and Osteosclerosis Immobilization, osteomalacia, the postmenopausal state, renal disease, multiple myeloma, hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, metastatic carcinoma, or glucocorticoid use may accelerate osteoporosis and weaken the vertebral body, leading to compression fractures and pain. Up to two-thirds of compression fractures seen on radiologic imaging are asymptomatic. The most common nontraumatic vertebral body fractures are due to postmenopausal or senile osteoporosis (Chap. 425). The risk of an additional vertebral fracture at 1 year following a first vertebral fracture is 20%. The presence of fever, weight loss, fracture at a level above T4, or the conditions described above should increase suspicion for a cause other than senile osteoporosis. The sole manifestation of a compression fracture may be localized back or radicular pain exacerbated by movement and often reproduced by palpation over the spinous process of the affected vertebra. Relief of acute pain can often be achieved with acetaminophen or a combination of opioids and acetaminophen. The role of NSAIDs is controversial. Both pain and disability are improved with bracing. Antiresorptive drugs, especially bisphosphonates (e.g., alendronate), have been shown to reduce the risk of osteoporotic fractures and are the preferred treatment to prevent additional fractures. Less than one-third of patients with prior compression fractures are adequately treated for osteoporosis despite the increased risk for future fractures; even fewer at-risk patients without a history of fracture are adequately treated. Given the negative results of sham-controlled studies of percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) and of kyphoplasty for osteoporotic 118 compression fractures associated with debilitating pain, these procedures are not routinely recommended. Osteosclerosis, an abnormally increased bone density often due to Paget’s disease, is readily identifiable on routine x-ray studies and can sometimes be a source of back pain.
Bone pain unrelated to fracture is most likely osteomalacia rather than osteoporosis. Smoking, excessive caffeine or alcohol intake, a history of estrogen-depleting conditions (e.g., amenorrhea, eating disorders), thyroid dysfunction, and steroid use are all associated with an ↑ risk. DEXA: The gold standard; reveals significant osteopenia (bone mineral density < 2.5 SDs from normal peak level), most commonly in the vertebral bodies, proximal femur, and distal radius. Labs: Markers of bone turnover (↑ urinary N-telopeptides and deoxypyridinoline) can facilitate diagnosis in equivocal cases but are not routinely used; rule out 2° causes with TFTs, CMP, serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D, CBC, and testosterone (in men). X-rays: Global demineralization is apparent only after > 30% of bone density is lost. Osteoporosis is the most common cause of pathologic fractures in elderly, thin women. F IGU R E 2.3-2. Radiographic findings in osteoporosis. compression). (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of

Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 2269.) Prevention with calcium supplementation and vitamin D.

Smoking cessation and weight-bearing exercises help maintain bone density. Bisphosphonates (e.g., alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, zoledronic acid), selective estrogen receptor modulators (e.g., raloxifene), and intranasal calcitonin may be used to prevent resorption and stabilize bone mineral density. Estrogen replacement therapy may be indicated for short-term treatment in the symptomatic perimenopausal period.
1. Type I primary osteoporosis occurs in post-menopausal women. Since this type appears at an earlier stage of life than type II, its long-term effect is usually more severe than osteoporosis that de-velops in the later years of life. 2. Type II primary osteoporosis occurs in elderly individuals in their seventh or eighth decade of life and is the leading cause of serious morbidity and functional loss in this age group. 3. Secondary osteoporosis develops as a result of drug therapy (i.e., corticosteroids) or disease pro-cesses that may affect bone remodeling, including malnutrition, prolonged immobilization, weightless-ness (i.e., with space travel), and metabolic bone dis-eases (i.e., hyperparathyroidism, metastatic cancers). Osteoporotic bone has normal histologic structure; however, there is less tissue mass (Fig. F8.2.1). This results in weakened bones that are more prone to fractures follow-ing even minor trauma. Femoral head and neck fractures (commonly known as hip fractures), wrist fractures, and compressed vertebrae fractures are common injuries that frequently disable and confine an elderly person to a wheelchair. Individuals suffering from fractures are at greater risk for death, not directly from the fracture, but from the complications of hospitalization because of immo-bilization and increased risk of pneumonia, pulmonary thrombosis, and embolism. Traditional treatment of individuals with osteoporosis in-cludes an improved diet with vitamin D and calcium sup-plementation and moderate exercise to help slow further bone loss. In addition to diet and exercise, pharmacologic therapy directed toward slowing down bone resorption is employed. Until recently, the treatment of choice in post-menopausal women with osteoporosis was hormone re-placement therapy with estrogen and progesterone.
For many patients, first-generation (eg, haloperidol) and second-generation agents (eg, risperidone) are of equal efficacy for treating positive symptoms. Second generation agents are often more effective for treating negative symptoms and cogni-tive dysfunction and have lower risk of tardive dyskinesia and hyperprolactinemia. Other indications for the use of selected antipsychotics include bipolar disorder, psychotic depression, Tourette syndrome, disturbed behavior in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and in the case of older drugs (eg, chlorpromazine), treatment of emesis, and pruritus. Charles DeBattista, MD house and has no motivation, interest, or energy to pursue recreational activities that she once enjoyed such as hiking. She describes herself as “chronically miserable and worried all the time.” Her medical history is notable for chronic neck pain from a motor vehicle accident for which she is being treated with tramadol and meperidine. In addition, she is on hydrochlorothiazide and propranolol for hypertension. The patient has a history of one depressive episode after a divorce that was treated successfully with fluoxetine. Medical workup including complete blood cell count, thyroid func-tion tests, and a chemistry panel reveals no abnormalities. She is started on fluoxetine for a presumed major depressive episode and referred for cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. What CYP450 and pharmacodynamic interactions might be associated with fluoxetine use in this patient? Which class of antidepressants would be contraindicated in this patient? A 47-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a chief complaint of fatigue. She indicates that she was promoted to senior manager in her company approximately 11 months earlier. Although her promotion was welcome and came with a sizable raise in pay, it resulted in her having to move away from an office and group of colleagues she very much enjoyed. In addition, her level of responsibility increased dramatically.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Typically presents in late adolescence or early adulthood; prevalence is equal in males and females. Often a chronic condition that is diff cult to treat. Hx/PE: ■Obsessions: Persistent, unwanted, and intrusive ideas, thoughts, impulses, or images that lead to marked anxiety or distress (e.g., fear of contamination, fear of harm to oneself or to loved ones) and occur despite the patient’s attempts to prevent them. T AB LE 2.1 4-1. Anxiolytic Medications

SSRIs (f uoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram, escitalopram) First-line treatment for generalized anxiety disorder, OCD, and PTSD. Nausea, GI upset, somnolence, sexual dysfunction, agitation. Buspirone Generalized anxiety disorder, OCD, PTSD. Seizures with chronic use. No tolerance, dependence, or withdrawal. β-blockers Performance anxiety, PTSD. Bradycardia, hypotension. Benzodiazepines Anxiety, insomnia, alcohol withdrawal, muscle spasm, night terrors, sleepwalking. ↓ sleep duration; risk of abuse, tolerance, and dependence; disinhibition in young or old patients; confusion. Flumazenil (competitive antagonist at GABA receptor) Antidote to benzodiazepine intoxication. Resedation; nausea, dizziness, vomiting, and pain at the injection site.
Psychotic symptoms in younger children must bedifferentiated from manifestations of normal vivid fantasylife or abuse-related symptoms. Youth with posttraumatic stress disorder often have vivid recollections and nightmaresrelated to abuse but sometimes are less specific and caninclude nightmares with other negative topics. Psychological testing can be helpful in identifying psychotic thought processes. Treatment is based on a multimodal approach, including use of antipsychotic medications. First-line drugs are atypical antipsychotics (e.g., risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, and paliperidone). Second-line medications are typical antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, thiothixene, chlorpromazine, trifluoperazine, loxapine, and molindone). It is likely that the newer antipsychotics approved for adults will also work in youth. However, these are not yet approved in youth by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Anti-psychotics can be augmented with lithium or another mood stabilizer. Clozapine or electroconvulsive therapy is generally reserved for resistant cases. Psychosocial treatments, including skills training, supportive psychotherapy, behavior modification, and cognitive-behavioral therapy, are all appropriate and should be considered as needed for individual patients. Attention should be paid to psychoeducation for parents and the child about the disease and its treatments. School interventions are needed to ensure that any special learning needs are addressed. The course of illness for schizophrenia varies in exacerbations and remissions of psychotic symptoms. The poorest prognosis is seen if the onset is at an age younger than 13 years, with poor premorbid function, when marked negative symptoms are present, and when a family history of schizophrenia exists.
Shapiro JR et al: Bulimia nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Eat Disord 2007;40:321. Soomro GM et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) versus placebo for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;1:CD001765. Stein MB, Stein DJ: Social anxiety disorder. Lancet 2008;371(9618):1115. Stone EA, Lin Y, Quartermain D: A final common pathway for depression? Progress toward a general conceptual framework. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2008;32:508. Thase ME et al: A meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled trials of vortioxetine for the treatment of major depressive disorder in adults. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2016;26:979. Tuccori M et al: Use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy and risk of major and cardiovascular malformations: An update. Postgrad Med 2010;122:49. Warden D et al: The STAR *D Project results: A comprehensive review of findings. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2007;9:449.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
Plasma Na+ concentration was initially 129 meq/L, decreasing within 3 days to 118–120 meq/L despite fluid restriction to 1 L/d. A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a right 2.8 × 1.6 cm infrahilar mass and postobstructive pneumonia. The patient was an active smoker. Past medical history was notable for laryngeal carcinoma treated 15 years prior with radiation therapy, renal cell carcinoma, peripheral vascular disease, and hypothyroidism. On review of systems, he denied headache, nausea, and vomiting. He had chronic hip pain, managed with acetaminophen with codeine. Other medications included cilostazol, amoxicillin/clavulanate, digoxin, diltiazem, and thyroxine. He was euvolemic on examination, with no lymphadenopathy and a normal chest examination. Na+ 120 K+ 4.3 Cl− 89 HCO3− 23 BUN 8 Creat 1.0 Glu 93

Alb 3.1 Ca 8.9 Phos 2.8 Mg 2.0 Plasma osm 248 mOsm/kg

Cortisol 25 μg/dL TSH 2.6 Uric acid 2.7 mg/dL

Urine: Na+ 97 K+ 22 Cl− 86 Osm 597

The patient was treated with furosemide, 20 mg PO bid, and salt tablets. The plasma Na+ concentration increased to 129 meq/L with this therapy; however, the patient developed orthostatic hypotension and dizziness. He was started on demeclocycline, 600 mg PO in the morning and 300 mg in the evening, just before discharge from hospital. Plasma Na+ concentration increased to 140 meq/L with a BUN of 23 and creatinine of 1.4, at which point demeclocycline was reduced to 300 mg PO bid. Bronchoscopic biopsy eventually showed small-cell lung cancer; the patient declined chemotherapy and was admitted to hospice. What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options?
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
Prostacy-clin (PGI2) has an inhibitory effect on Th1 and Th2-mediated immune responses, while enhancing Th17 differentiation and cytokine production. Leukotrienes are potent mediators of capil-lary leakage as well as leukocyte adherence, neutrophil activa-tion, bronchoconstriction, and vasoconstriction. Leukotriene B4 is synthesized from arachidonic acid in response to acute Ca2+ signaling induced by inflammatory mediators.162 High affinity leukotriene receptors (BLT1) are expressed primarily in leu-kocytes, including granulocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, and differentiated T cells, whereas the low affinity receptor is expressed in many cell types. Leukotrienes, most notably leu-kotriene B4 (LTB4), has been implicated in the development of both acute lung injury and acute kidney injury following hemor-rhagic shock in animal models.163,164Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4701/03/19   6:49 PM 48BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPhospholipidPhospholipase A2CorticosteroidsCyclooxygenaseLipoxygenaseProstaglandinsPGD2PGE2PGF2˜PGI2ThromboxaneTXA2Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid(HETE)LeukotrienesLTA4LTB4LTC4LTD4LTE4Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid(HPETE)Cyclic endoperoxides(PGG2,PGH2)Arachidonic acidAFree eicosapentaenoic acidCyclooxygenaseLipoxygenase3-seriesprostaglandins5-seriesleukotrienesPGG3LTA5LTC5LTB5PGH35-HPEPEAnti-inflammatory andinflammation resolvingE-seriesresolvinsBFigure 2-6. Schematic diagram of (A) arachidonic acid and (B) eicosapentaenoic acid metabolism. LT = leukotriene; PG = prostaglandin; TXA2 = thromboxane A2; HPEPE = hydroperoxyeicosapentaenoic acid.Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fat Metabolites: All-cis-5, 8, 11, 14, 17-Eicosapentaenoic Acid. The second major family of PUFAs is the omega-3 fatty acid, α-linolenic acid, which is found primarily in cold water fish. α-Linolenic acid is the metabolic precursor of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Omega-3 PUFAs are also sub-strates for the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase enzymes that produce eicosanoids, but the mediators produced have a differ-ent structure from the AA-derived mediators, and this influences their actions (Fig. 2-6B). For example, omega-3 fatty acids are reported to have specific anti-inflammatory effects, including inhibition of NF-κB activity, TNF release from hepatic Kupffer cells, and leukocyte adhesion and migration. Key derivatives of omega-3 PUFAs have also been identified and synthesized. These include resolvins, protectins, and maresins. In a vari-ety of model systems, resolvins have been shown to attenuate the inflammatory phenotypes of a number of immune cells by decreasing neutrophil recruitment, reducing synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines and regulating transcription factor activation.165,166The ratio of dietary omega-6 to omega-3 PUFA is reflected in the membrane composition of various cells, including cells of the immune system, which has potential implications for the inflammatory response. For example, a diet that is rich in omega-6 PUFA will result in cells whose membranes are “omega-6 PUFA rich.” When omega-6 PUFAs are the main plasma membrane lipid available for phospho-lipase activity, more proinflammatory PUFAs (i.e., 2-series prostaglandins) are generated.
The rest of the examination is unremarkable. His laboratory findings are also negative except for slight anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate, and positive rheumatoid factor. With the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, he is started on a regimen of naproxen, 220 mg twice daily. After 1 week, the dosage is increased to 440 mg

The immune response occurs when immunologically competent cells are activated in response to foreign organisms or antigenic substances liberated during the acute or chronic inflammatory response. The outcome of the immune response for the host may be deleterious if it leads to chronic inflammation without resolution of the underlying injurious process (see Chapter 55). Chronic inflammation involves the release of multiple cytokines and chemokines plus a very complex interplay of immunoactive cells. The whole range of autoimmune diseases (eg, RA, vasculitis, SLE) and inflammatory conditions (eg, gout) derive from abnormalities in this cascade. The cell damage associated with inflammation acts on cell membranes to release leukocyte lysosomal enzymes; arachidonic acid is then liberated from precursor compounds, and various eicosanoids are synthesized (see Chapter 18). The lipoxygenase pathway of arachidonate metabolism yields leukotrienes, which have a powerful chemotactic effect on eosinophils, neutrophils, and macrophages and promote bronchoconstriction and alterations in vascular permeability. During inflammation, stimulation of the neutrophil membranes produces oxygen-derived free radicals and other reactive molecules such as hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals. The interaction of these substances with arachidonic acid results in the generation of chemotactic substances, thus perpetuating the inflammatory process. The treatment of patients with inflammation involves two primary goals: first, the relief of symptoms and the maintenance of function, which are usually the major continuing complaints of the patient; and second, the slowing or arrest of the tissue-damaging process. In RA, several validated combined indices are used to define response (eg, Disease Activity Score28 [DAS28], American College of Rheumatology Response Index [ACR Response], Clinical Disease Activity Score [CDAI], Simplified Disease Activity Index [SDAI]). These indices often combine joint tenderness and swelling, patient response, and laboratory data. Reduction of inflammation with NSAIDs often results in relief of pain for significant periods.
Inflammation, even if it is localized, is associated with cytokine-induced systemic reactions that are collectively called the acute-phase response. Anyone who has suffered through a severe bout of a bacterial or viral illness (e.g., pneumonia or influenza) has experienced the systemic manifestations of acute inflammation. These changes are reactions to cytokines whose production is stimulated by bacterial products such as LPS, viral double stranded RNA and by other inflammatory stimuli. The cytokines TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 are important mediators of the acute-phase reaction; other cytokines, notably type I interferons, also contribute to the reaction. The acute-phase response consists of several clinical and pathologic changes:

Fever, characterized by an elevation of body temperature, usually by 1° to 4°C, is one of the most prominent manifestations of the acute-phase response, especially when inflammation is associated with infection. Substances that induce fever are called pyrogens. The increase in body temperature is caused by prostaglandins that are produced in the vascular and perivascular cells of the hypothalamus. Bacterial products, such as LPS (called exogenous pyrogens), stimulate leukocytes to release cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF (called endogenous pyrogens) that increase the enzymes (cyclooxygenases) that convert arachadonic acid into prostaglandins. In the hypothalamus, the prostaglandins, especially PGE2, stimulate the production of neurotransmitters that reset the temperature set point at a higher level. NSAIDs, including aspirin, reduce fever by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. How, and even if, fever contributes to the protective host response remains unclear. Acute-phase proteins are plasma proteins, mostly synthesized in the liver, whose plasma concentrations may increase several hundred-fold as part of the response to inflammatory stimuli. Three of the best-known of these proteins are C-reactive protein (CRP), fibrinogen, and serum amyloid A (SAA) protein. Synthesis of these molecules in hepatocytes is stimulated by cytokines. Many acute-phase proteins, such as CRP and SAA, bind to microbial cell walls, and they may act as opsonins and fix complement.
Interleukins are synthesized mainly by helper CD4 T lymphocytes and to a lesser extent by monocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells. Interleukins promote growth and differentiation of T cells, B cells, and hematopoietic cells. Currently, more than 29 interleukins have been identified. Interleukin 2 was the first cytokine to be discovered and characterized. Mutations in the genes encoding several cytokine receptors have been identified in several  immunodeficiency disorders, bacterial sepsis, certain lymphoid cancers, and diseases of autoimmunity. For instance, individuals with a mutation in the IL-12 receptor gene cannot mount an effective immune response against mycobacterial (fungal) infections. Cytokines have been used with promising results to prevent transplant rejection, reverse cellular deficiencies after chemotherapy and radiation therapy, and treat certain cancers. The major functions of selected interleukins are summarized in Table 14.3. APCs interact with helper CD4 T lymphocytes to facilitate immune responses. The interaction between most antigens and antibodies is insufficient to stimulate immune responses. The antigen must be broken into small peptides and presented in conjunction with MHC II molecules by specialized APCs to the appropriate helper CD4 T lymphocytes. Antigen can also be processed as a part of the B-cell activation pathway. Most APCs belong to the mononuclear phagocytotic system (MPS; described in Chapter 6, Connective Tissue, page 185). APCs include macrophages, perisinusoidal macrophages (Kupffer cells) of the liver, Langerhans’ cells in the epidermis, and dendritic cells of spleen and lymph nodes. Two APCs that do not belong to the MPS are B lymphocytes and type II and type III epithelioreticular cells of the thymus.
It has been speculated that they may contribute to the pathophysiology of inflammatory responses in a manner insensitive to COX inhibitors. A particular difficulty in assessing the likely biologic functions of isoprostanes—several of which have been shown to serve as incidental ligands at prostaglandin receptors—is that while high concentrations of individual isoprostanes may be necessary to elicit a response, multiple compounds are formed coincidentally in vivo under conditions of oxidant stress. Analogous leukotriene and EET isomers have been described. As a result of their short half-lives, the eicosanoids act mainly in an autocrine and a paracrine fashion, ie, close to the site of their synthesis, and not as circulating hormones. These ligands bind to receptors on the cell surface, with pharmacologic specificity determined by receptor density and type on different cells (Figure 18–4). A single gene product has been identified for each of the PGI2 (IP), PGF2α (FP), and TXA2 (TP) receptors, while four distinct PGE2 receptors (EPs 1–4) and two PGD2 receptors (DP1 and DP2) have been cloned. Additional isoforms of the human TP (α and β), FP (A and B), and EP3 (Ia, Ib, Ic, II, III, IV, and e) receptors can arise through differential mRNA splicing. Two receptors exist for LTB4 (BLT1 and BLT2) and for LTC4/LTD4 (cysLT1 and cysLT2). It appears that LTE4 functions through one or more receptors distinct from cysLT1/cysLT2, with some evidence that the orphan receptor GPR99 and the ADP receptor P2Y12 may function as LTE4 receptors. The formyl peptide (fMLP)-1 receptor can be activated by lipoxin A4 and consequently has been termed the ALX receptor. Receptor heterodimerization has been reported for a number of the eicosanoid receptors, providing for additional receptor subtypes from the currently identified gene products. All of these receptors are G protein-coupled; properties of the best-studied receptors are listed in Table 18–1. EP2, EP4, IP, and DP1 receptors activate adenylyl cyclase via Gs. This leads to increased intracellular cAMP levels, which in turn activate specific protein kinases (see Chapter 2). EP1, FP, and TP activate phosphatidylinositol metabolism, leading to the formation of inositol trisphosphate, with subsequent mobilization of Ca2+ stores and an increase of free intracellular Ca2+.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
A general evaluation that includes complete blood count, serum and 24-h urine calcium, renal and hepatic function tests, and a 25(OH)D level is useful for identifying selected secondary causes of low bone mass, particularly for women with fractures or very low Z-scores. An elevated serum calcium level suggests hyperparathyroidism or malignancy, whereas a reduced serum calcium level may reflect malnutrition and osteomalacia. In the presence of hypercalcemia, a serum PTH level differentiates between hyperparathyroidism (PTH↑) and malignancy (PTH↓), and a high PTHrP level can help document the presence of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (Chap. 424). A low urine calcium (<50 mg/24 h) suggests osteomalacia, malnutrition, or malabsorption; a high urine calcium (>300 mg/24 h) is indicative of hypercalciuria and must be investigated further. Hypercalciuria occurs primarily in three situations: (1) a renal calcium leak, which is more common in males with osteoporosis; (2) absorptive hypercalciuria, which can be idiopathic or associated with increased 1,25(OH)2D in granulomatous disease; or (3) hematologic malignancies or conditions associated with excessive bone turnover such as Paget’s disease, hyperparathyroidism, and hyperthyroidism. Renal hypercalciuria is treated with thiazide diuretics, which lower urine calcium and help improve calcium economy. Individuals who have osteoporosis-related fractures or bone density in the osteoporotic range should have a measurement of serum 25(OH)D level, because the intake of vitamin D required to achieve a target level >20–30 ng/mL is highly variable. Vitamin D levels should be optimized in all individuals being treated for

Consider vertebral imaging tests in the following individuals: mineral density (BMD) T-score is –1.0 or below

In women age 65–69 and men age 75–79 if BMD T-score is –1.5 or below

In postmenopausal women age 50–64 and men age 50–69 with specific risk factors: º Historical height loss of 1.5 in. or more (4 cm) º Prospective height loss of 0.8 in. or more (2 cm)

Source: From the 2014 National Osteoporosis Foundation Clinician’s Guide to the Prevention and Treatment of Osteoporosis. © National Osteoporosis Foundation. osteoporosis. Hyperthyroidism should be evaluated by measuring thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). When there is clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome, urinary free cortisol levels or a fasting serum cortisol should be measured after overnight dexamethasone.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
In this regard, most consider 140/90 mm Hg as the upper limit of normal for blood pressure values. But, in the United States, these values are based primarily on actuarial tables constructed using data derived from white adult males and compiled by life insurance companies. These "norms" disregard interrelated factors such as ethnicity, gender, and other important covariants. he importance of race, for example, was emphasized by Kotchen (2015), who cites the incidence of hypertensiondeined as blood pressurea> 140/90 mm Hg-to be 34 percent in blacks, 29 percent in whites, and 21 percent in Mexican Americans. For many years, the Joint National Committee has promulgated guidelines for diagnosis, classification, and management of chronic hypertension. In 2008, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute discontinued these guidelines, and the Joint National Committee 8 GNC 8) was instead asked to provide an evidence-based review Games, 2014). Findings pertinent to caring for young women with chronic hypertension are summarized in Table

Proven benefits accrue with treatment of otherwise normal adults who have sustained hypertension. Numerous studies evaluating many combinations of antihypertensive therapy have been conducted. Importantly, these trials evaluated monotherapy versus combination therapeutic regimens and their ethnospecific beneits. Most evaluated cardiovascular outcomes, but many also confirmed risk reductions in rates of cerebrovascular accident, renal insuficiency, and mortality. Because of these incontrovertible beneits, the JNC 8 recommends the management outlined in Table 50-1. Thus, even for mildly elevated blood pressure, interventions to reduce these sequelae are beneficial (SPRINT Research Group, 2015). Moreover, antihypertensive therapy in nonpregnant reproductive-aged women with sustained diastolic pressures ::90 mm Hg is considered standard. Not clear from these observations, however, is what constitutes the best management for women being treated who contemplate pregnancy, for those undergoing treatment who become pregnant, or for those first identified to have chronic hypertension during pregnancy (August, 2015). In these women, the benefits and safety of instituting antihypertensive therapy are less clear, as subsequently discussed on page 981.
A Foley catheter should be inserted in patients unable to void to decompress the blad-der, obtain a urine specimen, and monitor urine output. Gross hematuria demands evaluation of the genitourinary system for injury. Foley catheter placement may be deferred until urologic evaluation in patients with signs of urethral injury: blood at the meatus, perineal or scrotal hematomas, or a high-riding prostate. Although policies vary at individual institutions, most agree that patients in extremis should undergo one attempt at Foley catheter placement; if the catheter does not pass easily, a supra-pubic cystostomy should be considered.Selective radiography and laboratory tests are done early in the evaluation after the primary survey. For patients with severe blunt trauma, chest and pelvic radiographs should be obtained. Historically, a lateral cervical spine radiograph was also obtained, hence the reference to the big three films, but currently patients preferentially undergo CT scanning of the spine rather than plain film radiography. For patients with truncal gunshot wounds, anteroposterior and at times lateral radiographs of the chest and abdomen are warranted. It is important to mark the entrance and exit sites of penetrating wounds with ECG pads, metallic clips, or staples so that the trajectory of the missile can be estimated. Limited one-shot extremity radiographs may also be appropriate to assist in application of a splint. In critically injured patients, blood samples for a routine trauma panel (type and crossmatch, complete blood count, blood chemistries, coagulation studies, and arterial blood gas analysis) should be sent to the laboratory. For less severely injured patients, only a complete blood count and urinalysis may be required. Because older patients may pres-ent in subclinical shock, even with minor injuries, routine analy-sis of an arterial blood gas in patients over the age of 55 should be considered. Repeat FAST is mandatory if there are any signs of abdominal injury or unexplained blood loss.Many trauma patients cannot provide specific information about the mechanism of their injury. Emergency medical ser-vice personnel and police are trained to evaluate an injury scene and should be questioned while they are present in the ED. For automobile collisions, the speed of the vehicles involved, angle of impact, location of the patient within the vehicle, use of restraints, airbag deployment, condition of the steer-ing wheel and windshield, amount of intrusion, ejection of the patient from the vehicle, and fate of other passengers should be ascertained.
Require immediate attention by the orthopedist owing to their life-threatening potential. May present with an unstable pelvis upon compression. Pelvic x-rays may confirm the fracture; in a stable patient, a CT scan of the pelvis will better define the extent of injury. If hypotension and shock are present, an exsanguinating hemorrhage is likely. In the field, MAST (military antishock trousers; rarely used today) can be used to maintain adequate BP and organ perfusion. Consider embolization of bleeding vessels, emergent external pelvic fixation, or, in a hemodynamically stable patient, internal fixation. Give blood early. Hemorrhage results in death in 50% of patients. Pelvic injuries can be associated with urethral injury. It is suggested by blood at the urethral meatus; a high-riding, “ballotable” prostate; or lack of a prostate. If present, a retrograde urethrogram must be performed to rule out injury before a Foley catheter is placed. Never explore a pelvic or retroperitoneal hematoma. Follow with serial hemoglobin and hematocrit. Table 2.17-1 summarizes the basic management of cardiac arrhythmias in an acute setting. T AB LE 2.1 7 -1.
Fast track CT scanning should be used in all patients manifesting evidence of shock. The surgeon must accompany the patient and be prepared to abort the CT scan with diversion to the OR. This dilemma is becoming less common in many trauma centers where CT scanning is available in the ED.The concept of hypotensive resuscitation remains contro-versial, and it is primarily relevant for patients with penetrating vascular injuries. Experimental work suggests that an endog-enous sealing clot of an injured artery may be disrupted at a SBP of >90 mmHg32; thus, many believe that this should be the preoperative blood pressure target for patients with potential noncompressible arterial injuries. On the other hand, optimal management of traumatic brain injury (TBI) includes maintain-ing the SBP >100 mmHg,33 and thus, hypotensive resuscitation is not appropriate for most blunt trauma patients.Secondary SurveyOnce the immediate threats to life have been addressed, a thor-ough history is obtained, and the patient is examined in a sys-tematic fashion. The patient and surrogates should be queried to obtain an AMPLE history (Allergies, Medications, Past illnesses or Pregnancy, Last meal, and Events related to the injury). The physical examination should be literally head to toe, with special attention to the patient’s back, axillae, and perineum, because injuries here are easily overlooked. All seriously injured patients should undergo digital rectal examination to evaluate for sphincter tone, presence of blood, rectal perforation, or a high-riding prostate; this is particularly critical in patients with suspected spinal cord injury, pelvic fracture, or transpelvic gun-shot wounds. Vaginal examination with a speculum should be performed in women with pelvic fractures to exclude an open fracture. Specific injuries, their associated signs and symptoms, diagnostic options, and treatments are discussed in detail later in this chapter.Adjuncts to the physical examination include vital sign and ECG monitoring, nasogastric tube placement, Foley cath-eter placement, radiographs, hemoglobin, base deficit measure-ments, urinalysis, and repeat FAST exam. A nasogastric tube should be inserted in all intubated patients to decrease the risk of gastric aspiration, but it may not be necessary in the awake patient. Nasogastric tube placement in patients with complex mid-facial fractures is contraindicated; rather, a tube should be placed orally if required. Nasogastric tube evaluation of stomach contents for blood may suggest occult gastroduodenal injury, or the errant path of the nasogastric tube on a chest film may indicate a left diaphragm injury. A Foley catheter should be inserted in patients unable to void to decompress the blad-der, obtain a urine specimen, and monitor urine output. Gross hematuria demands evaluation of the genitourinary system for injury.
CT scans are used to identify and grade splenic injury. Nonoperative management is the treatment of choice formost serious splenic injuries, unless there is continued largeblood loss or hemodynamic instability. If a splenectomy isperformed, patients should receive penicillin prophylaxis andshould receive pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzaevaccines to decrease the increased risk of overwhelming sepsis. Major trauma to the liver is a serious cause of morbidity. Severe hemorrhage is more common in patients with liver injury than with other abdominal injuries because of its dual blood supply. Without significant vascular injury, hepatic injury presents and behaves clinically like a splenic injury. Nonoperative management is recommended but requires close clinical observation for signs of ongoing blood loss or hemodynamic instability. As with splenic injury, there is a grading system based on the pattern of injury. The kidney is less frequently injured than the liver or spleen, and when injured is often associated with other injuries. A young child’s kidney is more vulnerable to trauma than an adult’s because of a more compliant rib cage and relatively immature abdominal muscle development. The diagnosis of renal injury is based on history and physical examination coupled with urinalysis showing blood and increased protein levels. An ultrasound or CT may also be useful. Low-grade renal injury is usually managed conservatively, with bed rest, catheter drainage, and monitoring for resolution of injury by ultrasound or CT. Surgery may be required for falling hemoglobin levels, refractory shock, or urinary obstruction caused by clots. Injuries of the pancreas are less common in children than inadults but are seen in bicycle handlebar injuries, motor vehicle crashes, and nonaccidental trauma.
For unstable patients with suspected hemoperitoneum or tamponade, do a focused abdominal sonography for trauma (FAST) scan. Four spaces are checked for blood: between the right kidney and liver (Morrison’s pouch), between the left kidney and spleen (the splenorenal recess), posterior to the bladder (the pouch of Douglas), and in the pericardium. Hemoperitoneum requires immediate surgical consultation for operative management; hemopericardium requires immediate pericardiocentesis. Radiology studies should be ordered on the basis of the patient assessment. A CXR is needed for all patients with thoracic trauma, and a head CT should be ordered for all patients with loss of consciousness or depressed mental status. A C-spine CT is needed for all patients with neck pain or tenderness, neurologic findings, or depressed mental status. After urethral injury has been ruled out, place a Foley catheter if it is necessary to monitor urine output (e.g., in hemodynamically unstable patients, patients receiving ﬂuid resuscitation, or patients undergoing major surgery). Pertinent labs should be ordered based on the mechanism of injury, suspicion of intoxication or OD, and past medical history. A rough estimate of SBP can be made on the basis of palpated pulses. Carotids correspond roughly to an SBP of 60 mmHg, femorals to an SBP of 70 mmHg, and radials to an SBP of 80 mmHg. The evaluation and treatment of penetrating trauma depend on the location and extent of the injury. Intubate early. Immediate surgical exploration is mandatory for patients with shock and active ongoing hemorrhage from neck wounds. All wounds that violate the platysma are considered true penetrating neck trauma. The neck is divided into three zones, and treatment varies according to which zone is injured (see Figure 2.17-1).
267-2D) due to mid-systolic closure of the aortic valve. LVH is present on the ECG, and the diagnosis is confirmed by TTE. Although the systolic murmur associated with MVP behaves similarly to that due to HOCM in response to the Valsalva maneuver and to standing/squatting (Fig. 51e-3), these two lesions can be distinguished on the basis of their associated findings, such as the presence of LVH in HOCM or a nonejection click in MVP. The mid-systolic, crescendo-decrescendo murmur of congenital pulmonic stenosis (PS, Chap. 282) is best appreciated in the second and third left intercostal spaces (pulmonic area) (Figs. 51e-2 and 51e-4). The duration of the murmur lengthens and the intensity of P2 diminishes with increasing degrees of valvular stenosis (Fig. 51e1D). An early ejection sound, the intensity of which decreases with inspiration, is heard in younger patients. A parasternal lift and ECG evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy indicate severe pressure overload. If obtained, the chest x-ray may show poststenotic dilation of the main pulmonary artery. TTE is recommended for complete characterization. Significant left-to-right intracardiac shunting due to an ASD (Chap. 282) leads to an increase in pulmonary blood flow and a grade 2–3 mid-systolic murmur at the middle to upper left sternal border

CHAPTER 51e Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur

FIguRe 51e-3 A mid-systolic nonejection sound (C) occurs in mitral valve prolapse and is followed by a late systolic murmur that crescendos to the second heart sound (S2).
LV >> aortic pressure during systole. Loudest at heart base; radiates to carotids. “Pulsus parvus et tardus”—pulses are weak with a delayed peak. Can lead to Syncope, Angina, and Dyspnea on exertion (SAD). Most commonly due to age-related calcification in older patients (> 60 years old) or in younger patients with early-onset calcification of bicuspid aortic valve. Holosystolic, high-pitched “blowing murmur.” Mitral—loudest at apex and radiates toward axilla. MR is often due to ischemic heart disease (post-MI), MVP, LV dilatation. Tricuspid—loudest at tricuspid area. TR commonly caused by RV dilatation. Rheumatic fever and infective endocarditis can cause either MR or TR. Late systolic crescendo murmur with midsystolic click (MC) due to sudden tensing of chordae tendineae as mitral leaflets prolapse into the LA (Chordae cause Crescendo with Click). Most frequent valvular lesion. Best heard over apex. Loudest just before S2. Usually benign.
The murmur becomes softer with passive leg raising and when squatting. The murmur of AS is typically loudest in the second right interspace with radiation into the carotids, whereas the murmur of HOCM is best heard between the lower left sternal border and the apex. The murmur of PS is best heard in the second left interspace. The midsystolic murmur associated with enhanced pulmonic blood flow in the setting of a large atrial septal defect (ASD) is usually loudest at the mid-left sternal border. is low-pitched or rumbling, and is introduced by an OS in the early stages of the rheumatic disease process. Presystolic accentuation refers to an increase in the intensity of the murmur just before the first heart sound and occurs in patients with sinus rhythm. It is absent

FIGURE 267-6 Behavior of the click (C) and murmur (M) of mitral valve prolapse with in patients with atrial fibrillation. The aus changes in loading (volume, impedance) and contractility. S1, first heart sound; S2, sec cultatory findings in patients with rheumatic ond heart sound. With standing (left side of figure), volume and impedance decrease, as a tricuspid stenosis typically are obscured by result of which the click and murmur move closer to S . With squatting (right), the click and 1 left-sided events, although they are similar in murmur move away from S due to the increases in left ventricular volume and impedance 1 nature to those described in patients with MS.

(afterload). Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle. (Adapted from RA O’Rourke, MH Crawford: Curr Prob

Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System

Cardiol 1:9, 1976.) A late systolic murmur, heard best at the apex, indicates MVP. As previously noted, the murmur may or may not be introduced by a nonejection click.
The pulmonic component of the second heart sound (P2) also is often accentuated with elevated PA pressures, and the two components of the second heart sound (S2) are closely split. The opening snap (OS) of the mitral valve is most readily audible in expiration at, or just medial to, the cardiac apex. This sound generally follows the sound of aortic valve closure (A2) by 0.05–0.12 s. The time interval between A2 and OS varies inversely with the severity of the MS. The OS is followed by a low-pitched, rumbling, diastolic murmur, heard best at the apex with the patient in the left lateral recumbent position (see Fig. 267-5); it is accentuated by mild exercise (e.g., a few rapid sit-ups) carried out just before auscultation. In general, the duration of this murmur correlates with the severity of the stenosis in patients with preserved CO. In patients with sinus rhythm, the murmur often reappears or becomes louder during atrial systole (presystolic accentuation). Soft, grade I or II/VI systolic murmurs are commonly heard at the apex or along the left sternal border in patients with pure MS and do not necessarily signify the presence of MR. Hepatomegaly, ankle edema, ascites, and pleural effusion, particularly in the right pleural cavity, may occur in patients with MS and RV failure. Associated Lesions With severe pulmonary hypertension, a pansystolic murmur produced by functional TR may be audible along the left sternal border. This murmur is usually louder during inspiration and diminishes during forced expiration (Carvallo’s sign). When the CO is markedly reduced in MS, the typical auscultatory findings, including the diastolic rumbling murmur, may not be detectable (silent MS), but they may reappear as compensation is restored. The Graham Steell murmur of PR, a high-pitched, diastolic, decrescendo blowing murmur along the left sternal border, results from dilation of the pulmonary valve ring and occurs in patients with mitral valve disease and severe pulmonary hypertension. This murmur may be indistinguishable from the more common murmur produced by aortic regurgitation (AR), although it may increase in intensity with inspiration and is accompanied by a loud and often palpable P2. LABORATORY EXAMINATION ECG In MS and sinus rhythm, the P wave usually suggests LA enlargement (see Fig. 268-8).
The intensity of a heart murmur may be diminished by any process that increases the distance between the intracardiac source and the stethoscope on the chest wall, such as obesity, obstructive lung disease, and a large pericardial effusion. The intensity of a murmur also may be misleadingly soft when cardiac output is reduced significantly or when the pressure gradient between the involved cardiac structures is low. Location and Radiation Recognition of the location and radiation of the murmur helps facilitate its accurate identification (Fig. 51e-2). Adventitious sounds, such as a systolic click or diastolic snap, or abnormalities of S1 or S2 may provide additional clues. Careful attention to the characteristics of the murmur and other heart sounds

CHAPTER 51e Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

FIguRe 51e-2 Maximal intensity and radiation of six isolated systolic murmurs. HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; MR, mitral regurgitation; Pulm, pulmonary stenosis; Aortic, aortic stenosis; VSD, ventricular septal defect. (From JB Barlow: Perspectives on the Mitral Valve. Philadelphia, FA Davis, 1987, p 140.) during the respiratory cycle and the performance of simple bedside maneuvers complete the auscultatory examination. These features, along with recommendations for further testing, are discussed below in the context of specific systolic, diastolic, and continuous heart murmurs (Table 51e-1). SYSTOLIC HeART MuRMuRS early Systolic Murmurs Early systolic murmurs begin with S1 and extend for a variable period, ending well before S2. Their causes are relatively few in number. Acute, severe MR into a normal-sized, relatively noncompliant left atrium results in an early, decrescendo systolic murmur best heard at or just medial to the apical impulse. These characteristics reflect the progressive attenuation of the pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the left atrium during systole owing to the rapid rise in left atrial pressure caused by the sudden volume load into an unprepared, noncompliant chamber and contrast sharply with the auscultatory features of chronic MR. Clinical settings in which acute, severe MR occur include (1) papillary muscle rupture complicating acute myocardial infarction (MI) (Chap.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Angina, if present, is usually manifested by episodic, inconsolable crying that coincides with feeding. As discussed previously, evidence of poor peripheral perfusion, such as extreme pallor, indicates severe LVOT obstruction. Differen-tial cyanosis is an uncommon finding, but it is present when enough antegrade flow occurs only to maintain normal upper body perfusion, while a large patent ductus arteriosus produces blue discoloration of the abdomen and legs.Physical findings include a systolic ejection murmur, although a quiet murmur may paradoxically indicate a more severe condition with reduced cardiac output. A systolic click correlates with a valvular etiology of obstruction. As LV dys-function progresses, evidence of congestive heart failure occurs.The chest radiograph is variable but may show dilatation of the aortic root, and the ECG often demonstrates LV hypertro-phy. Echocardiography with Doppler flow is extremely useful in establishing the diagnosis, as well as quantifying the transvalvular gradient. Furthermore, echocardiography can facilitate evaluation for the several associated defects that can be present in critical neonatal AS, including mitral stenosis, LV hypoplasia, LV endo-cardial fibroelastosis, subaortic stenosis, VSD, or coarctation. The presence of any or several of these defects has important impli-cations related to treatment options for these patients. Although cardiac catheterization is not routinely performed for diagnostic purposes, it can be invaluable as part of the treatment algorithm if the lesion is amenable to balloon valvotomy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is another very useful technique for assessing the adequacy of the left-sided structures and is increasingly utilized to determine candidacy for biventricular repairs.Treatment. As alluded to previously, the first decision that must be made in the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction is whether the patient is a candidate for biventricular or univen-tricular repair. Central to this decision is assessment of the degree of hypoplasia of the LV and other left-sided structures. Alsoufi and colleagues25 have described a rational approach to the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction. The options vary depending on whether the infant follows a single or a 3biventricular pathway. The options for a single ventricle include the Norwood operation, a hybrid strategy (initial ductal stent and bilateral pulmonary artery bands followed by later completion of the Norwood operation) or heart transplantation.
The usual recovery after a cardiac arrest first involves a return to a normal heart rate, followed by disappearance of cyanosis and noticeably improved perfusion. An infant may remain limp and be apneic for a prolonged time after return of cardiac output and correction of acidosis. Breathing initially should be briefly delayed if meconium-stained amniotic fluid is present to avoid dissemination of meconium into the lungs, producing severe aspiration pneumonia. If meconium is noted in the amniotic fluid, the oropharynx should be suctioned when the head is delivered. After the birth of a depressed infant, the oral cavity should be

Table 58-9 Life-Threatening Congenital Anomalies NAME MANIFESTATIONS Choanal atresia (stenosis) Respiratory distress in delivery room, apnea, unable to pass nasogastric tube through nares Pierre Robin syndrome Micrognathia, cleft palate, airway obstruction

Diaphragmatic hernia Scaphoid abdomen, bowel sounds present in left chest, heart shifted to right, respiratory distress, polyhydramnios

Tracheoesophageal fistula Polyhydramnios, aspiration pneumonia, excessive salivation, unable to place nasogastric tube in stomach

Intestinal obstruction: volvulus, Polyhydramnios, bile-stained emesis, abdominal distention duodenal atresia, ileal atresia

Renal agenesis/Potter syndrome Oligohydramnios, anuria, pulmonary hypoplasia, pneumothorax

Neural tube defects: anencephaly, Polyhydramnios, elevated α-fetoprotein; decreased fetal activity meningomyelocele

Down syndrome (trisomy 21) Hypotonia, congenital heart disease, duodenal atresia

Ductal-dependent congenital heart Cyanosis, murmur, shock disease suctioned again; the vocal cords should be visualized and the infant intubated. C represents circulation and external cardiac massage. Ifartificial ventilation does not improve bradycardia, if asystole is present, or if peripheral pulses cannot be palpated,external cardiac massage should be performed at a rate of 120 compressions/minute with compressions and breathsgiven at a ratio of 3:1. External cardiac massage usually is notneeded because most infants in the delivery room respondto ventilation. D represents the administration of drugs. If bradycardia is unresponsive to ventilation or if asystole is present, epinephrine should be administered. Intravenous (IV) epinephrine (1:10,000), 0.1 to 0.3 mL/kg, should be given through an umbilical venous line or injected into the endotracheal tube. However, when epinephrine is administered through the endotracheal tube, the result is often unpredictable. Before medications are administered in the presence of electrical cardiac activity with poor pulses, it is important to determine whether there is a pneumothorax. Transillumination of the thorax, involving the use of a bright light through each side of the thorax and over the sternum, may suggest pneumothorax if one side transmits more light than the other. Breath sounds may be decreased over a pneumothorax and there may be a shift of the heart tones away from the side of a tension pneumothorax.
Between weeks 35 and 38 of gestation, rapid increase in the size of the fetus outpaces the growth of the uterus, and the relative amount of amniotic fluid (which normally acts as a cushion) also decreases. Thus, even the normal fetus is subjected to some degree of uterine constraint. However, several variables increase the likelihood of excessive compression of the fetus, including maternal conditions such as first pregnancy, small uterus, malformed (bicornuate) uterus, and leiomyomas. Causes relating to the fetus, such as presence of multiple fetuses, oligohydramnios, and abnormal fetal presentation, also may be involved. Sequence refers to multiple congenital anomalies that result from secondary effects of a single localized aberration in organogenesis. The initiating event may be a malformation, deformation, or disruption. An excellent example is the oligohydramnios (or Potter) sequence (

Fig. 7.23A ). Oligohydramnios (decreased amniotic fluid) may be caused by a variety of maternal, placental, or fetal abnormalities, including chronic leakage of amniotic fluid because of rupture of the amnion; uteroplacental insufficiency resulting from maternal hypertension or severe toxemia; and renal agenesis in the fetus (because fetal urine is a major constituent of amniotic fluid). The fetal compression associated with oligohydramnios in turn results in a classic phenotype in the newborn infant consisting of flattened faces and positional abnormalities of the hands and feet (

Fig. 7.23B ). The hips may be dislocated. Growth of the chest wall and the lungs also is compromised, sometimes to such an extent that

Fig. 7.22 Disruptionduetoamnioticbands.Inthespecimenshown,theplacentaisattheright,andthebandofamnionextendsfromthetopportionoftheamnioticsactoencirclethelegofthefetus. (Courtesy of Dr.Theonia Boyd, Children’s Hospital of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts.)
Of rare placental sources, placental aromatase deiciency from a fetal CP 19 gene mutation causes an accumulation of placental androgen and underproduction of placental estrogens (Chap. 5, p. 105) Gones, 2007). Consequently, both the mother and the 46,X fetus are virilized. Delivery of a newborn with a disorder of sexual diferentiation is a potential medical emergency and can create possible longlasting psychosexual and social ramiications for the individual and family. Ideally, as soon as the afected neonate is stable, parents are encouraged to hold the child. he newborn is referred to as "your baby," and suggested terms include "phallus," "gonads," "folds," and "urogenital sinus" to reference underdeveloped structures. The obstetrician explains that the genitalia are incompletely formed and emphasizes the seriousness of the situation and the need for rapid consultation and laboratory testing. Because similar or identical phenotypes may have several etiologies, identiication of a speciic DSD may require several diagnostic tools (McCann-Crosby, 2015). Relevant neonatal physicl examination evaluates: (1) ability to palpate gonads in the labioscrotal or inguinal regions, (2) ability to palpate uterus during rectl examination, (3) phallus size, (4) genitalia pigmentation, and (5) presence of other syndromic features. The newborn metabolic condition is assessed, as hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypoglycemia may indicate CAH. he mother is examined for signs of hyperandrogenism. Other neonatal tests include genetic studies, hormone measurements, imaging, and in some cases endoscopic, laparoscopic, and gonadal biopsy. Sonography shows the presence or absence of miillerian/wolian structures, n locate the gonads, and can identiy associated mlformations such as renal anomalies. Very early during embryo formation, a bilaminar cloacal membrane lies at the caudal end of the germinal disc and forms the infraumbilical abdominal wall. Normally, an ingrowth of mesoderm between the ectodermal and endodermal layers of the cloacal membrane leads to formation of the lower abdomi nal musculature and pelvic bones.
Addi-tionally, various nonatherosclerotic conditions can also cause symptoms consistent with intermittent lower extremity claudi-cation (Table 23-18). Nocturnal calf muscle spasms or night cramps are not indicative of arterial disease. They are common but are difficult to diagnose with certainty. Foot ulceration is not always the result of arterial insufficiency. Ischemic ulcers occur on the toes or lateral side of the foot and are painful. By com-parison, venous ulcers, which are also common, occur above the medial malleolus, usually in an area with the skin changes of lipodermatosclerosis, and cause mild discomfort. Neuropathic ulcers are usually found on weight-bearing surfaces, have thick calluses, and are pain free. Ulcers may be the result of more than one etiology. Rest pain must be distinguished from periph-eral neuropathy, which is prevalent in diabetic patients. Patients with diabetic neuropathy tend to have decreased vibration and Figure 23-59. High-resolution computed tomography angiogra-phy of a patient with normal right lower extremity arterial circu-lation. Distal occlusive disease is noted in the left tibial arteries (arrow).position sense and decreased reflexes. Spinal stenosis causes pain that is exacerbated with standing and back extension.Lower Extremity Occlusive Disease ClassificationLower extremity occlusive disease may range from exhibiting no symptoms to limb-threatening gangrene. There are two major classifications developed based on the clinical presentations.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95127/02/19   4:15 PM 952SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-60. Multidetector computed tomography angiography of a patient with an (A) infrapopliteal arterial circulation and (B) pedal arterial circulation.
The foot is usually cold to touch with absent pedal pulses. The foot is painful to touch with decreased distal capil-lary refills.Figure 23-64. Computed tomography angiogram of a patient with an occluded left superficial femoral artery (single long arrow) with reconstituted superficial femoral artery at the level of mid-thigh. Diffuse arterial calcifications (double small arrows) are noted in the mid and distal left superficial femoral arteries.multilevel disease are more severe than in those with single-level disease. Pain from isolated SFA and popliteal occlusion typically manifests as calf claudication. Cramping pain develops in the calf on ambulation, occurs at a reproducible distance, and is relieved by rest. Activities such as climbing stairs or going uphill also exacerbate the pain. Many patients report worsen-ing symptoms during cold weather. It is important to evaluate whether the symptoms are progressive or static. In greater than 70% of patients, the disease is stable, particularly with risk fac-tor modification.Progression of the underlying atherosclerotic process is more likely to occur in patients with diabetes, those who con-tinue to smoke, and those who fail to modify their atherosclerotic risk factors. In comparison, rest pain is constant, and usually occurs in the forefoot across the metatarsophalangeal joint. It is worse at night and requires placing the foot in a dependent posi-tion to improve symptoms. Patients may report that they either sleep in a chair or hang the foot off the side of the bed. The pain is severe and relentless, even with narcotics. Ischemic ulcer-ation most commonly involves the toes.
The lower extremities are most commonly affected. Clinical manifestations depend on the vessels involved, the extent and rate of obstruction, and the presence of collateral blood ﬂ ow. Presents with intermittent claudication (reproducible leg pain that occurs with walking and is always relieved with rest). As the disease progresses, pain occurs at rest and affects the distal extremities. Dorsal foot ulcerations may develop 2° to poor perfusion. A painful, cold, numb foot is characteristic of critical limb ischemia. Aortoiliac disease: Associated with Leriche’s syndrome (buttock claudication, ↓ femoral pulses, male impotence). Femoropopliteal disease: Calf claudication; pulses below the femoral artery are absent. Acute ischemia: Most often caused by embolization from the heart; acute occlusions commonly occur at bifurcations distal to the last palpable pulse. May also be 2° to cholesterol atheroembolism (“blue toe syndrome”). ■Severe chronic ischemia: Lack of blood perfusion leads to muscle atrophy, pallor, cyanosis, hair loss, and gangrene/necrosis. Carefully palpate pulses and auscultate for bruits. Measurement of ankle and brachial systolic BP (ankle-brachial index, or ABI) can provide objective evidence of atherosclerosis (rest pain usually occurs with an ABI < 0.4). A high ABI can indicate calcification of the arteries. Doppler ultrasound helps identify stenosis and occlusion.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
Motor and sensory neuropathy lead to abnormal foot muscle mechanics and to structural changes in the foot (hammer toe, claw toe deformity, prominent metatarsal heads, Charcot joint). Autonomic neuropathy results in anhidrosis and altered superficial blood flow in the foot, which promote drying of the skin and fissure formation. PAD and poor wound healing impede resolution of minor breaks in the skin, allowing them to enlarge and to become infected. Many individuals with type 2 DM develop a foot ulcer (great toe or metatarsophalangeal areas are most common), and a significant subset who develop an ulceration will ultimately undergo amputation (14–24% risk with that ulcer or subsequent ulceration). Risk factors for foot ulcers or amputation include male sex, diabetes for >10 years, peripheral neuropathy, abnormal structure of foot (bony abnormalities, callus, thickened nails), PAD, smoking, history of previous ulcer or amputation, visual impairment, and poor glycemic control. Large calluses are often precursors to or overlie ulcerations. The optimal therapy for foot ulcers and amputations is prevention through identification of high-risk patients, education of the patient, and institution of measures to prevent ulceration. High-risk patients should be identified during the routine, annual foot examination performed on all patients with DM (see “Ongoing Aspects of Comprehensive Diabetes Care” in Chap. 418). If the monofilament test or one of the other tests is abnormal, the patient is diagnosed with loss of protective sensation (LOPS; Chap. 417). Providers should consider screening for asymptomatic PAD in individuals >50 years of age who have diabetes and other risk factors using anklebrachial index testing in high-risk individuals (Chap. 302). Patient education should emphasize (1) careful selection of footwear, (2) daily inspection of the feet to detect early signs of poor-fitting footwear or minor trauma, (3) daily foot hygiene to keep the skin clean and moist, (4) avoidance of self-treatment of foot abnormalities and high-risk behavior (e.g., walking barefoot), and (5) prompt consultation with a health care provider if an abnormality arises. Patients at high risk for ulceration or amputation may benefit from evaluation by a foot care specialist.
Antibodies to the hemagglutinin appear to be the most important mediators of immunity; in several studies, HI titers of ≥40 have been associated with protection from infection. Secretory antibodies produced in the respiratory tract are predominantly of the IgA class, and secretory antibody neutralization titers of ≥4 have also been associated with protection. A variety of cell-mediated immune responses, both antigen-specific and antigen-nonspecific, can be detected early after infection and depend on the prior immune status of the host. These responses include T cell proliferative, T cell cytotoxic, and natural killer cell activity. In humans, CD8+ as well as CD4+ T lymphocytes are directed at conserved regions of internal proteins (NP, M, and P) as well as at the surface proteins H and N. Interferons can be detected in respiratory secretions shortly after the shedding of virus has begun, and rises in interferon titers coincide with decreases in virus shedding. The host defense factors responsible for cessation of virus shedding and resolution of illness have not been defined specifically. Virus shedding generally stops within 2–5 days after symptoms first appear, at a time when serum and local antibody responses often are not detectable by conventional techniques, although antibody rises may be detected earlier by use of highly sensitive techniques, particularly in individuals with previous immunity to the virus. It has been suggested that interferon, cell-mediated immune responses, and/or nonspecific inflammatory responses all contribute to the resolution of illness. CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses may be particularly important in this regard. Influenza is most frequently described as a respiratory illness characterized by systemic symptoms, such as headache, feverishness, chills, myalgia, and malaise, as well as accompanying respiratory tract signs and symptoms, particularly cough and sore throat. In some cases, the onset is so abrupt that patients can recall the precise time they became ill. However, the spectrum of clinical presentations is wide, ranging from a mild, afebrile respiratory illness similar to the common cold (with either a gradual or an abrupt onset) to severe prostration with relatively few respiratory signs and symptoms. In most of the cases that come to a physician’s attention, the patient has a fever, with temperatures of 38°–41°C (100.4°–105.8°F). A rapid temperature rise within the first 24 h of illness is generally followed by gradual defervescence over 2–3 days, although, on occasion, fever may last as long as 1 week. 1212 Patients report a feverish feeling and chilliness, but true rigors are rare.
743

A-36 Knockdown of gene expression by

References. 744

RNA interference (RNAi). 790

Appendix I The Immunologist's Toolbox 749

A-1. Immunization. 749

A-2 Antibody responses. 752

A-3 Affinity chromatography. 753

A-4 Radioimmunoassay (RIA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and competitive inhibition assay. 753

A-5 Hemagglutination and blood typing. 755

A-6 Coombs tests and the detection of rhesus incompatibility. 756

A-7 Monoclonal antibodies. 757

A-8 Phage display libraries for antibody V-region  production. 758

A-9 Generation of human monoclonal antibodies from vaccinated individuals. 759

A-10 Microscopy and imaging using fluorescent dyes. 760

A-11 Immunoelectron microscopy. 761

A-12 Immunohistochemistry.
Which statements are true? explain why or why not. 24–1 T cells whose receptors strongly bind a self-peptide–MHC complex are killed off in peripheral lymphoid organs when they encounter the self peptide on an antigen-presenting dendritic cell. 24–2 To guarantee that the antigen-presenting cells in the thymus will display a complete repertoire of self peptides to allow elimination of self-reactive T cells, the thymus recruits dendritic cells from all over the body. 24–3 The antibody diversity created by the combinatorial joining of V, D, and J segments by V(D)J recombination pales in comparison to the enormous diversity created by the random gain and loss of nucleotides at V, D, and J joining sites. Discuss the following problems. 24–4 Why do living trees not rot? Redwood trees, for example, can live for centuries, but once they die they decay fairly quickly. What might this suggest? 24–5 It would be disastrous if a complement attack were not confined to the surface of the pathogen that is the target of the attack. Yet, the proteolytic cascade involved in the attack liberates biologically active molecules at several steps: one that diffuses away and one that remains bound to the target surface. How does the complement reaction remain localized when active products leave the surface? [Hint: imagine what would happen if the G:U mismatch created by AID was replicated several times; how would the sequences of the final mutations relate to the original G-C base pair?] 24–7 For many years it was a complete mystery how cytotoxic T cells could see a viral protein that seemed to be present only in the nucleus of the virus-infected cell. The answer was revealed in a classic paper that took advantage of a clone of T cells whose T cell receptor was directed against an antigen assoicated with the nuclear protein of the 1968 strain of influenza virus.
Peptide antigens presented by MHC molecules are recognized by the T-cell receptor (TCR), a heterodimer that in most T cells is composed of disulfide-linked α and β protein chains (

Fig. 5.5). Each chain has a variable region that participates in binding a particular peptide antigen and a constant region that interacts with associated signaling molecules. TCRs are noncovalently linked to a cluster of five invariant polypeptide chains, the γ, δ, and ε proteins of the CD3 molecular complex and two ζ chains (see

Fig. 5.5 ). The CD3 proteins and ζ chains do not bind antigens; instead, they are attached to the TCR and initiate intracellular biochemical signals after TCR recognition of antigen. T cells also express a number of other molecules that serve important functions in immune responses. CD4 and CD8 are expressed on distinct T-cell subsets and act as coreceptors during T-cell activation. During antigen recognition, CD4 molecules on T cells bind to invariant portions of class II MHC molecules (described later) on selected antigen-presenting cells (APCs); in an analogous fashion, CD8 binds to class I MHC molecules. CD4 is expressed on 50% to 60% of T cells, whereas CD8 is expressed on about 40% of T cells. The CD4-and CD8-expressing T cells— called CD4+ and CD8+ cells, respectively—perform different but overlapping functions. CD4+ T cells are called helper T cells because they secrete soluble molecules http://ebooksmedicine.net

Neutralization of microbe, B lymphocyte B + phagocytosis, complement activation

Activation of macrophages

Microbial antigen presented by antigen-presenting cells Activation (proliferation B T and differentiation) of B T T and B lymphocytes

Killing of infected cell (CTL) T

Regulatory Suppression of T lymphocyte T immune response

Killing of infected cell cell

Fig. 5.4 The principal classes of lymphocytes and their functions. B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes are cells of adaptive immunity, and natural killer (NK) cells are cells of innate immunity. Several more classes of lymphocytes have been identified, including NK-T cells and so-called “innate lymphoid cells” (ILCs); the functions of these cells are not established. (cytokines) that help B cells to produce antibodies and also help macrophages to destroy phagocytosed microbes.
The lipid envelope of influenza A virus also contains the M proteins M1 and M2, which are involved in stabilization of the lipid envelope and in virus assembly. The virion also contains the NP antigen, which is associated with the viral genome, as well as three polymerase (P) proteins that are essential for transcription

FIGuRE 224-1 An electron micrograph of influenza A virus (×40,000). and synthesis of viral RNA. Two nonstructural proteins function as an interferon antagonist and posttranscriptional regulator (NS1) and a nuclear export factor (NS2 or NEP). The genomes of influenza A and B viruses consist of eight single-strand RNA segments, which code for the structural and nonstructural proteins. Because the genome is segmented, the opportunity for gene reassortment during infection is high; reassortment often takes place during infection of cells with more than one influenza A virus. Influenza outbreaks occur virtually every year, although their extent and severity vary widely. Localized outbreaks take place at variable intervals, usually every 1–3 years. Global pandemics have occurred at variable intervals, but much less frequently than interpandemic outbreaks (Table 224-1). The most recent pandemic emerged in March of 2009 and was caused by an influenza A/H1N1 virus that rapidly spread worldwide over the next several months. Influenza A Virus • antigenic variation and inflUenza oUtbreaks and pandemics The most extensive and severe outbreaks of influenza are caused by influenza A viruses, in part because of the remarkable propensity of the H and N antigens of these viruses to undergo periodic antigenic variation. Major antigenic variations, called antigenic shifts, are seen only with influenza A viruses and may be associated with pandemics. Minor variations are called antigenic drifts. Antigenic variation may involve the hemagglutinin alone or both the hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase. An example of an antigenic shift involving both the hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase is that of 1957, when the predominant influenza A virus subtype shifted from H1N1 to H2N2; this shift resulted in a severe pandemic, with an estimated 70,000 excess deaths (i.e., deaths in excess of the number expected without an influenza epidemic) in the United States alone.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
Zandi PP et al: Hormone replacement therapy and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in older women. JAMA 2002;288:2123. The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her osteoporosis. Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD, & Umesh Masharani, MBBS, MRCP (UK)

A 66-year-old obese Caucasian man presented to an academic Diabetes Center for advice regarding his diabetes treatment. His diabetes was diagnosed 10 years previously on routine testing. He was initially given metformin but when his control deteriorated, the metformin was stopped and insulin treatment initiated. The patient was taking 50 units of insulin glargine and an average of 25 units of insulin aspartate pre-meals. He had never seen a diabetes educator or a dietitian. He was checking his glucose levels 4 times a day. He was smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day. On examination, his weight was 132 kg (BMI 39.5); blood pressure 145/71; and signs of mild peripheral neuropathy were present. Laboratory tests noted an HbA1c value of 8.1%, urine albumin 3007 mg/g creatinine (normal <30), serum creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (0.61–1.24), total choles-terol 128 mg/dL, triglycerides 86 mg/dL, HDL cholesterol 38 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 73 mg/dL (on atorvastatin 40 mg daily). How would you treat this patient?
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
The words a patient uses to describe shortness of breath can suggest certain etiologies for dyspnea. Patients with obstructive lung disease often complain of “chest tightness” or “inability to get a deep breath,” whereas patients with congestive heart failure more commonly report “air hunger” or a sense of suffocation. The tempo of onset and the duration of a patient’s dyspnea are likewise helpful in determining the etiology. Acute shortness of breath is usually associated with sudden physiologic changes, such as laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, or pneumothorax. Patients with COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) experience a gradual progression of dyspnea on exertion, punctuated by acute exacerbations of shortness of breath. In contrast, most asthmatics have normal breathing the majority of the time with recurrent episodes of dyspnea that are usually associated with specific triggers, such as an upper respiratory tract infection or exposure to allergens. Specific questioning should focus on factors that incite dyspnea as well as on any intervention that helps resolve the patient’s shortness of breath. Asthma is commonly exacerbated by specific triggers, although this can also be true of COPD. Many patients with lung disease report dyspnea on exertion. Determining the degree of activity that results in shortness of breath gives the clinician a gauge of the patient’s degree of disability. Many patients adapt their level of activity to accommodate progressive limitation. For this reason, it is important, particularly in older patients, to delineate the activities in which they engage and how these activities have changed over time. Dyspnea on exertion is often an early symptom of underlying lung or heart disease and warrants a thorough evaluation. Cough generally indicates disease of the respiratory system. The clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it is associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it.
It is generally not seen in asthma, so its presence should heighten concern for other diagnoses. Clubbing may also be present in nonpulmonary chronic diseases (cardiac, gastrointestinal, or hematologic) or, rarely, as a familial trait. Pleural effusion Deviation to Reduced over None or Dull None Egophony Muffled opposite side area reduced

Interstitial No Reduced Normal to Normal Normal Inspiratory None process

Adapted from Andreoli TE, Bennett JC, Carpenter CJ, et al, editors: Cecil Essentials of Medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, p 115. PMI, Point of maximum impulse. *In egophony, e sounds like a (may be a sign of consolidation but also is associated with moderate-sized pleural effusions). †In pectoriloquy, words/voice sounds clearer over the affected site (associated with consolidation and cavitary lesions). Cough results from stimulation of irritant receptors in the airway mucosa. Acute cough generally is associated with respiratory infections or irritant exposure (smoke) and subsides as the infection resolves or the exposure is eliminated. The characteristics of the cough and the circumstances under which the cough occurs help in determining the cause. Sudden onset after a choking episode suggests foreign body aspiration. Morning cough may be due to the accumulation of excessive secretions during the night from sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, or bronchial infection. Nighttime coughing is a hallmark of asthma and can also be caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease. Cough exacerbated by lying flat may be due to postnasal drip, sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, or reflux. Recurrent coughing with exercise is suggestive of exercise-induced asthma/bronchospasm. Paroxysmal cough suggests pertussis or foreign body aspiration.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
The duration of cough is a clue to its etiology. Acute cough (<3 weeks) is most commonly due to a respiratory tract infection, aspiration, or inhalation of noxious chemicals or smoke. Subacute cough (3–8 weeks in duration) is a common residuum of tracheobronchitis, as in pertussis or “postviral tussive syndrome.” Chronic cough (>8 weeks) may be caused by a wide variety of cardiopulmonary diseases, including those of inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic, and cardiovascular etiologies. When initial assessment with chest examination and radiography is normal, cough-variant asthma, gastroesophageal reflux, nasopharyngeal drainage, and medications (angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors) are the most common causes of chronic cough. Details as to the sound, the time of occurrence during the day, and the pattern of coughing infrequently provide useful etiologic clues. Regardless of cause, cough often worsens upon first lying down at night, with talking, or with the hyperpnea of exercise; it frequently improves with sleep. An exception may involve the cough that occurs only with certain allergic exposures or exercise in cold air, as in asthma. Useful historical questions include what circumstances surround the onset of cough, what makes the cough better or worse, and whether or not the cough produces sputum. The physical examination seeks clues suggesting the presence of cardiopulmonary disease, including findings such as wheezing or crackles on chest examination. Examination of the auditory canals and tympanic membranes (for irritation of the latter resulting in stimulation of Arnold’s nerve), the nasal passageways (for rhinitis or polyps), and the nails (for clubbing) may also provide etiologic clues. Because cough can be a manifestation of a systemic disease such as sarcoidosis or vasculitis, a thorough general examination is equally important. In virtually all instances, evaluation of chronic cough merits a chest radiograph. The list of diseases that can cause persistent cough without other symptoms and without detectable abnormalities on physical examination is long. It includes serious illnesses such as sarcoidosis or Hodgkin’s disease in young adults, lung cancer in older patients, and (worldwide) pulmonary tuberculosis. An abnormal chest film prompts an evaluation aimed at explaining the cough.
Cough generally indicates disease of the respiratory system. The clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it is associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it. Acute cough productive of phlegm is often a symptom of infection of the respiratory system, including processes affecting the upper airway (e.g., sinusitis, tracheitis), the lower airways (e.g., bronchitis, bronchiectasis), and the lung parenchyma (e.g., pneumonia). Both the quantity and quality of the sputum, including whether it is blood-streaked or frankly bloody, should be determined. Hemoptysis warrants an evaluation as delineated in Chap. 48. Chronic cough (defined as that persisting for >8 weeks) is commonly associated with obstructive lung diseases, particularly asthma and chronic bronchitis, as well as “nonrespiratory” diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux and postnasal drip. Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases, including IPF, frequently present as a persistent, nonproductive cough. As with dyspnea, all causes of cough are not respiratory in origin, and assessment should encompass a broad differential, including cardiac and gastrointestinal diseases as well as psychogenic causes. Additional Symptoms Patients with respiratory disease may report wheezing, which is suggestive of airways disease, particularly asthma. Hemoptysis can be a symptom of a variety of lung diseases, including infections of the respiratory tract, bronchogenic carcinoma, and pulmonary embolism. In addition, chest pain or discomfort is often thought to be respiratory in origin. As the lung parenchyma is not innervated with pain fibers, pain in the chest from respiratory disorders usually results from either diseases of the parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax) or pulmonary vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary hypertension). As many diseases of the lung can result in strain on

Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System 1662 the right side of the heart, patients may also present with symptoms of cor pulmonale, including abdominal bloating or distention and pedal edema (Chap. 279).
The recommended screening levels are the same for all children 2 to 18 years. Total cholesterol of less than 170 mg/dL is normal, 170 to 199 mg/dL is borderline, and greater than 200 mg/dL is elevated. In addition, in 2011, the AAP endorsed the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health recommendation to test all children between ages 9 and 11. Annual office visits are recommended for adolescents. A full adolescent psychosocial history should be obtained in confidential fashion (see Section 12). Part of this evaluation is acomprehensive sexual history that often requires creative questioning. Not all adolescents identify oral sex as sex, and some adolescents misinterpret the term sexually active to mean that one has many sexual partners or is very vigorous during intercourse. The questions, “Are you having sex?” and “Have youever had sex?” should be asked. In the Bright Futures guidelines, any child or adolescent who has had any form of sexualintercourse should have at least an annual evaluation (moreoften if there is a history of high-risk sex) for sexually transmitted diseases by physical examination (genital warts, genitalherpes, and pediculosis) and laboratory testing (chlamydia,gonorrhea, syphilis, and HIV) (see Chapter 116). Youngwomen should be assessed for human papillomavirus and precancerous lesions by Papanicolaou smear at 21 years of age. Immunization records should be checked at each office visit, regardless of the reason. Appropriate vaccinations should be administered (see Chapter 94). Risk screening at ages 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and annually in adolescence: 1. Children and adolescents who have a family history of high cholesterol or heart disease 2. Children whose family history is unknown 3.
Pediatr Emerg Care 19:48,t2003 te Pas AB, Davis PG, Hooper SB, et a1: From liquid to air: breathing after birth.] Pediatr 152(5):607,t2008

Thongren-]eneck K, Herbst A: Low 5-minute Apgar score: a populationbased register study of 1 million term births. Obstet Gynecol 98:65, 200t1 horp ]A, Dildy GA, Yeomans ER, et a1: Umbilical cord blood gas analysis at delivery. Am] Obstet Gynecolt175(3 Pt 1):517,t1996

Tobian A, Serwadda D, Quinn TC, et al: Male circumcision for the prevention of HSV-2 and HPV infections and syphilis. N Engl ] Med 360(13): 1298, 2009

Tran TT: Hepatitis B: treatment to prevent perinatal transmission. Clin Obstet Gynecol 55(2):541, 2012 Upadhyay V, Hammodat HM, Pease PW: Post circumcision meatal stenosis: 12 years' experience. N Z Medt] Ill:57, 1998

Victory R, Penava D, da Silva 0, et a1: Umbilical cord pH and base excess values in relation to neonatal morbidity for infants delivered preterm. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 189(3):803,t2003

Vyas H, Milner AD, Hopkins IE: Intrathoracic pressure and volume changes during the spontaneous onset of respiration in babies born by cesarean section and by vaginal delivery.t] Pediatr 99(5):787, 1981

Watson MS, Mann MY, Lloyd-Puryear MA, et a1: Newborn screening: towards a uniform screening panel and system. Executive summary. Genet Med 8(Suppl 5):15, 2006

Weiner GM: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation. 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, American Academy of Pediatrics, 2016

White CR, Doherty DA, Cannon ]W, et a1: Cost efectiveness of universal umbilical cord blood gas and lactate analysis in a tertiary level matenity unit.] Perinat Med 44(5):573,t2016

White CR, Doherty DA, Henderson J], et a1: Beneits of introducing universal umbilical cord blood gas and lactate analysis into an obstetric unit. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(4):318, 2010

Whyte RK: Neonatal management and safe discharge of late and moderate preterm infants. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 17(3):153,t2012

World Health Organization: Postnatal care of the mother and newborn, 2013.
[Reviews recent advances in molecular characterization of bladder cancer.] Donovan B: Sexually transmitted infections other than HIV, Lancet 363:545, 2004. [A clinical review of STDs.] Epstein JI: An update of the Gleason grading system, J Urol 183:433, 2010. Fanfair RN, Workowski KA: Clinical update in sexually transmitted diseases—2014, Cleve Clin J Med 81:91, 2014. [A concise updated review with treatment recommendations.] Hanna NH, Einhorn LH: Testicular cancer—discoveries and updates, N Engl J Med 371:2005, 2014. [A comprehensive review of current pathologic and clinical features of testicular germ cell tumors.] Le BV, Schaeffer AJ: Genitourinary pain syndromes, prostatitis and lower urinary tract symptoms, Urol Clin North Am 36:527, 2009. [A recent review of the etiology, diagnosis, symptoms, and treatment of prostatitis and interstitial cystitis along with pelvic pain syndromes.] Lee PK, Wilkins KB: Condyloma and other infections including human immunodeficiency virus, Surg Clin North Am 90:99, 2010. Patel AK, Chapple CR: Medical management of lower urinary tract symptoms in men: current treatment and future approaches, Nat Clin Pract Urol 5:211, 2008. [This article clarifies the terminology used to evaluate men with lower urinary tract symptoms.] Rapley EA, Nathanson KL: Predisposition alleles for testicular germ cell tumour, Curr Opin Genet Dev 20:225, 2010. [An update on inherited risk factors in germ cell tumors.].
1.4). At the completion of the physical examination, the patient should be informed of the findings. When the results of the examination are normal, the patient can be reassured accordingly. When there is a possible abnormality, the patient should be informed immediately; this discussion should take place after the examination with the patient clothed. A plan to evaluate the findings should be outlined brieﬂy and in clear, understandable language. Figure 1.4 The rectovaginal examination. The implications and timing of any proposed procedure (e.g., biopsy) should be discussed, and the patient should be informed when the results of any tests will be available. Pediatric Patients A careful examination is indicated when a child presents with genital symptoms such as itching, discharge, burning with urination, or bleeding. The examiner should be familiar with the normal appearance of the prepubertal genitalia. The normal unestrogenized hymenal ring and vestibule can appear mildly erythematous. The technique of examination is different from that used for examining an adult and may need to be tailored to the individual child based on her age, size, and comfort with the examiner. A speculum examination should not be performed in a prepubertal child in the office. A young child usually can be examined best in a “frog leg” or “butterﬂy leg” position on the examining table. Some very young girls (toddlers or infants) do best when held in their mother’s arms. Sometimes, the mother can be positioned, clothed, on the examination table (feet in stirrups, head of table elevated) with the child on her lap, the child’s legs straddling her mother’s legs.
133. Majewski S, et al. The impact of a quadrivalent human papillomavirus (types 6, 11, 16, 18) virus-like particle vaccine in European women aged 16 to 24. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2009;23:1147– 1155. 134. Huppert JS, Biro FM, Mehrabi J, et al. Urinary tract infection and chlamydia infection in adolescent females. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2003;16:133–137. 135. Cook RL, Hutchison SL, Ostergaard L, et al. Systematic review: noninvasive testing for Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:914–925. 136. Schuchat A, Broome CV. Toxic shock syndrome and tampons.
In this case, the treatment of severe pain should be managed with the administration of a potent intravenous opioid anal-gesic such as morphine, hydromorphone, or fentanyl. Before an additional dose of an opioid analgesic is administered, it is expected that the patient will require frequent reevaluation of both the severity of his pain and the presence of potential adverse effects. Given his history of pulmonary disease, he is also at increased risk of developing respiratory depression. Concurrent use of nonopioid analgesics including nerve blocks with a local anesthetic can reduce opioid require-ments and risk of respiratory failure. Reevaluation of his level of consciousness, respiratory rate, fractional oxygen satura-tion, and other vital parameters can help achieve the goal of pain relief and minimize respiratory depression. Concurrent use of sedative agents such as benzodiazepines should be avoided if possible and proceed only with great caution. Drugs of Abuse

Christian Lüscher, MD

A 15-year-old high school student is brought to the emergency department after his parents found him in his room staring at the ceiling and visibly frightened. Earlier that evening, he attended a party but was depressed because his girlfriend just broke up with him. Jerry is failing this year at school and has stopped playing soccer. His parents are also worried about a change in his behavior over the last few months. He has lost interest in school, at times seems depressed, and tells his par-ents that his pocket money is not sufficient. When questioned by the intern, he reports that space-cookies were served at the party. He also says that smoking marijuana has become a habit (three to four joints a week) but denies consumption of alcohol and other drugs. How do you explain the state he was found in? What is the difference between hashish and marijuana?
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Patients will need narcotic analgesia for thawing. Monitor the ECG for arrhythmias such as bradycardia and slow atrial fibrillation. The stereotypic sign is the J wave (aka Osborn wave). Also monitor electrolytes and acid-base balance. Do not stop resuscitation efforts until the patient has been warmed. A body temperature > 104° F (40° C), possibly from heat stroke. Cool the patient with cold water, wet blankets, and ice. Consider a benzodiazepine to prevent convulsions. Rule out causes of fever such as infection or drug reaction. A hypoxemic poisoning syndrome seen in patients who have been exposed to automobile exhaust, smoke inhalation, barbecues, or old appliances in poorly ventilated locations. Presents with hypoxemia, cherry-red skin (rare), confusion, and headaches. Coma or seizures occur in severe cases. Chronic low-level exposure may cause ﬂ ulike symptoms with generalized myalgias, nausea, and headaches. Ask about symptoms in others living in the same house. Suspect smoke inhalation in the presence of singed nose hairs, facial burns, hoarseness, wheezing, or carbonaceous sputum.
He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated? Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
Hx/PE: Presents with tonic, bilateral, symmetric jerks of the head, trunk, and extremities that tend to occur in clusters of 5–10; arrest of psycho-motor development occurs at the age of seizure onset. The majority of patients have mental retardation. Dx: Look for an abnormal interictal EEG characterized by hypsarrhythmia. Tx: Hormonal therapy with ACTH, prednisone, and clonazepam or valproic acid. Medications may treat the spasms but have little impact on patients’ long-term prognosis. Treatment of status epilepticus: First ABCs, Then Begin Giving Naloxone: Fosphenytoin, ABCs, Thiamine, Benzodiazepine, Glucose, Naloxone. If a male infant is brought to the hospital with muscular jerks and an uncle who had the same problem, think infantile spasms (West syndrome). A common cause of recurrent peripheral vertigo resulting from a dislodged otolith that leads to disturbances in the semicircular canals (95% posterior, 5% horizontal). Hx/PE: Patients with posterior canal BPPV present with transient, episodic vertigo (lasting < 1 minute) and mixed upbeat-torsional nystagmus triggered by changes in head position (classically while turning in bed, getting in/out of bed, or reaching overhead). Some patients complain of nonvertiginous feelings of dizziness or lightheadedness. Nausea and vomiting are uncommon owing to the short-lived stimulus. Dx:

Have the patient turn his or her head 45 degrees right or left and go from a sitting to a supine position while quickly turning the head to the side (Dix-Hallpike maneuver). If vertigo and the typical nystagmus (upbeat and toward the affected shoulder) are reproduced, BPPV is the likely diagnosis. Nystagmus that persists for > 1 minute, gait disturbance, or nausea/ vomiting that is out of proportion to nystagmus should raise concern for a central lesion. Tx:

Some 80% of cases can be resolved at the bedside using the modified Epley maneuver (a 270-degree head rotation from the Dix-Hallpike testing position).
Nystagmus that persists for > 1 minute, gait disturbance, or nausea/ vomiting that is out of proportion to nystagmus should raise concern for a central lesion. Tx:

Some 80% of cases can be resolved at the bedside using the modified Epley maneuver (a 270-degree head rotation from the Dix-Hallpike testing position). With BPPV, it’s all in the name:

Benign = otolith (not a tumor). Paroxysmal = sudden, temporary episodes lasting < 1 minute. Positional = starts while turning in bed or reaching overhead. Vertigo = vertigo or dizziness is the main symptom. If you see a 27-year-old male who presents with vertigo and vomiting for one week after having been diagnosed with a viral infection, think acute vestibular neuritis. ■The condition usually subsides spontaneously in weeks to months but often recurs months or years later. Antivertigo medications (e.g., meclizine) are generally contraindicated, as they tend to inhibit central compensation, which may lead to chronic unsteadiness and falls in the elderly. Typically a diagnosis of exclusion once the more serious causes of vertigo (e.g., cerebellar stroke) have been ruled out. Hx/PE: Presents with acute onset of severe vertigo, head-motion intolerance, and gait unsteadiness accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and nystagmus. Auditory or aural symptoms (“labyrinthitis”) may include unilateral tinnitus, ear fullness, or hearing loss. Without auditory or aural symptoms (more common), the condition is known as “vestibular neuritis.”

Dx:

Acute peripheral vestibulopathy demonstrates the following:

An abnormal vestibulo-ocular reﬂex (VOR) as determined by a bedside head impulse test (i.e., rapid head rotation from lateral to center while staring at the examiner’s nose). A predominantly horizontal nystagmus that always beats in one direction, opposite the lesion. No vertical eye misalignment by alternate cover testing.
JAMA 2016;316:1392. Niebyl JR: Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2010;363:1544. Panula P et al: International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. XCVIII. Histamine receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2015;67:601. Preuss H et al: Constitutive activity and ligand selectivity of human, guinea pig, rat, and canine histamine H2 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Therap 2007;321:983. Rapanelli M, Pittenger C: Histamine and histamine receptors in Tourette syndrome and other neuropsychiatric conditions. Neuropharmacology 2016;106:85. Schaefer P: Urticaria: Evaluation and treatment. Am Fam Physician 2011;83:1078. Smits RA, Leurs R, deEdech JP: Major advances in the development of histamine H4 receptor ligands. Drug Discov Today 2009;14:745.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74:1. Wei J et al: Nicorandil stimulates a Na+/Ca2+ exchanger by activating guanylate cyclase in guinea pig cardiac myocytes. Pflugers Arch 2016;468:693. The case described is typical of coronary artery disease in a patient with hyperlipidemia. Her hyperlipidemia should be treated vigorously to slow progression of, and if pos-sible reverse, the coronary lesions that are present (see Chapter 35). Coronary angiography is not indicated unless symptoms become much more frequent and severe; revas-cularization may then be considered. Medical treatment of her acute episodes of angina should include sublingual tab-lets or sublingual nitroglycerin spray 0.4–0.6 mg. Relief of discomfort within 2–4 minutes can be expected. To prevent episodes of angina, a βblocker such as metoprolol should be tried first. If contraindications to the use of a β blocker are present, a mediumto long-acting calcium channel blocker such as verapamil, diltiazem, or amlodipine is likely to be effective. Because of this patient’s family history, an antiplatelet drug such as low-dose aspirin is indicated. Care-ful follow-up is mandatory with repeat lipid panels, repeat dietary counseling, and lipid-lowering therapy; coronary angiography should also be considered if her condition worsens. Sildenafil Viagra, Revatio

Tadalafil Cialis, Adcirca

Cilostazol Generic, Pletal

Pentoxifylline Generic, Trental

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 55-year-old man noticed shortness of breath with exer-tion while on a camping vacation in a national park. He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue.
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Aspirin is essential in the management of patients with suspected STEMI and is effective across the entire spectrum of acute coronary syndromes (Fig. 295-1). Rapid inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 in platelets followed by a reduction of thromboxane A2 levels is achieved by buccal absorption of a chewed 160–325-mg tablet in the Emergency Department. This measure should be followed by daily oral administration of aspirin in a dose of 75–162 mg. In patients whose arterial O2 saturation is normal, supplemental O2 is of limited if any clinical benefit and therefore is not cost-effective. However, when hypoxemia is present, O2 should be administered by nasal prongs or face mask (2–4 L/min) for the first 6–12 h after infarction; the patient should then be reassessed to determine if there is a continued need for such treatment. Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given safely to most patients with STEMI. Up to three doses of 0.4 mg should be administered at about 5-min intervals. In addition to diminishing or abolishing chest discomfort, nitroglycerin may be capable of both decreasing myocardial oxygen demand (by lowering preload) and increasing myocardial oxygen supply (by dilating infarct-related coronary vessels or collateral vessels). In patients whose initially favorable response to sublingual nitroglycerin is followed by the return of chest discomfort, particularly if accompanied by other evidence of ongoing ischemia such as further ST-segment or T-wave shifts, the use of intravenous nitroglycerin should be considered. Therapy with nitrates should be avoided in patients who present with low systolic arterial pressure (<90 mmHg) or in whom there is clinical suspicion of RV infarction (inferior infarction on ECG, elevated jugular venous pressure, clear lungs, and hypo-tension). Nitrates should not be administered to patients who have taken a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor for erectile dysfunction within the preceding 24 h, because it may potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates. An idiosyncratic reaction to nitrates, consisting of sudden marked hypotension, sometimes occurs but can usually be reversed promptly by the rapid administration of intravenous atropine. Morphine is a very effective analgesic for the pain associated with STEMI. However, it may reduce sympathetically mediated arteriolar and venous constriction, and the resulting venous pooling may reduce cardiac output and arterial pressure.
Vik SA et al: Medication nonadherence and subsequent risk of hospitalisation and mortality among older adults. Drugs Aging 2006;23:345. Wright JT Jr et al: A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2103. This patient has several conditions that warrant careful treat-ment. Hypertension is eminently treatable; the steps described in Chapter 11 are appropriate and effective in the elderly as well as in young patients. Patient education is critical in combating his reluctance to take his medications. Alzheimer’s disease may respond to one of the anticholinesterase agents (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine). Alternatively, memantine may be tried. Unfortunately, age-related macular degeneration (the most likely cause of his visual difficulties) is not readily treated, but the “wet” (neovascular) variety may respond well to one of the drugs currently available (bevacizumab, ranibizumab, pegaptanib). However, these therapies are expensive. Dirk B. Robertson, MD & Howard I. Maibach, MD

A 43-year-old woman presents with a complaint of worsen-ing rosacea. She initially responded to once-daily topical metronidazole 0.75% gel with excellent clearing of the papulopustular component of her acne rosacea. Recently, she has noted increasing persistent facial erythema. What therapeutic options are available?
Skin grafts might be indicated at times but cannot be expected to provide durable cov-erage in weight-bearing or high-shear areas. Local and regional flaps can be considered if the extremity is free of significant occlusive peripheral vascular or combined with vascular bypass. Microvascular free tissue transfers are appropriate when defects are large or when local flaps are not available. Combination lower extremity bypass and free flap coverage has proved benefi-cial for the treatment of the diabetic foot in terms of healing and reduction of disease progression (Table 45-6). Consultation with a podiatrist or an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in foot and ankle problems can be considered to improve foot biomechanics and manage bony prominences that act as pressure points on the soft tissue to reduce the risk of recurrent ulceration. Proper foot-wear (including orthotic devices and off-loading shoe inserts), hygiene, and toenail and skin care are essential.60Lymphedema. Lymphedema is the abnormal accumulation of protein-rich fluid in the interstitial spaces of the tissues. It is a complex disorder with both congenital and acquired causes. No universally effective remedy has been devised, but a variety of treatment methods including reconstructive surgery have been effective in carefully selected patients.It is important to be familiar with the fundamentals of lymph physiology in order to understand the rationale for the various forms of lymphedema treatment. Lymph fluid is formed at the capillary level where there is a net outflow of fluid and serum proteins from the intravascular space into the intersti-tium. In the average adult, this amounts to approximately 3 liters of fluid daily. Open-ended lymph capillaries collect this fluid where the lymphatic endothelial cells form loose intercellular connections that freely allow fluid to enter. From here, the net-work of specialized vascular structures gathers the extravasated fluid and transports it back into central circulation. The system is a high-volume transport mechanism that clears proteins and lipids from the interstitial space primarily by means of differ-ential pressure gradients. Lymph fluid enters the lymph vessels driven by colloid and solute concentration gradients at the capil-lary level.
A large symmetric plaque with active tan-pink, well-demarcated, raised, firm borders and a yellow center in the pretibial regions of a 28-year-old diabetic woman is shown. The central parts of the lesion are depressed with atrophic changes of epidermal thinning and telangiectasis against a yellow background. (Source: K Wolff et al: Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.) See Chap. 417. Figure 436e-8 Patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia 2B syn-drome. Note the multiple neuromas on the lips and tongue and the marfanoid facies. (Source: DG Gardner, D Shoback, eds: Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2006, www .accessmedicine.com.) See Chap. 408. Figure 436e-10 Bone scan of a patient with severe Paget’s disease of the skull, ribs, spine, pelvis, right femur, and acetabulum. Note localization of bone-seeking isotope (99mTc-labeled bisphosphonate) in these areas. (Source: DG Gardner, D Shoback, eds: Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 8th ed.
2. 3. B. Poikiloderma 1. 2. 3. C. Mat 1. Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)

D. Periungual/cuticular 1. 2. 3. 4. E. Papular 1. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia

F. Spider angioma 1. Cirrhosis aBecoming less common. with actinically damaged skin and acne rosacea, and they are found on the legs of patients with venous hypertension and generalized essential telangiectasia. Patients with an unusual form of mastocytosis (telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans) and the carcinoid syndrome (see “Acne,” above) also have linear telangiectasias.
Compression can be accomplished via rigid or flexible means. The most commonly used method is the rigid, zinc oxide–impregnated, nonelastic bandage. Others have proposed a four-layered bandage approach as a more optimal method of obtaining graduated compression.109 Wound care in these patients focuses on maintaining a moist wound environ-ment, which can be achieved with hydrocolloids. Other, more modern approaches include use of vasoactive substances and growth factor application, as well as the use of skin substitutes. Recently, sprayed allogeneic keratinocytes and fibroblasts plus four-layer bandages have been shown to hasten healing when compared to compression alone.110 Addressing the causes of venous hypertension aids in the healing of venous ulcers.109 Unfortunately, recurrences are frequent despite preventative measures, largely because of patients’ lack of compliance.111Diabetic Wounds. Ten percent to 25% of diabetic patients run the risk of developing ulcers. There are approximately 50,000 to 60,000 amputations performed in diabetic patients each year in the United States. The major contributors to the formation of diabetic ulcers include neuropathy, foot deformity, and isch-emia. It is estimated that 60% to 70% of diabetic ulcers are due to neuropathy, 15% to 20% are due to ischemia, and another 15% to 20% are due to a combination of both. The neuropathy is both sensory and motor and is secondary to persistently elevated glucose levels. The loss of sensory function allows unrecognized injury to occur from ill-fitting shoes, foreign bodies, or other trauma. The motor neuropathy or Charcot’s foot leads to col-lapse or dislocation of the interphalangeal or metatarsophalan-geal joints, causing pressure on areas with little protection. There is also severe microand macrovascular circulatory impairment.Once ulceration occurs, the chances of healing are poor and the chances of recurrent ulceration are high. The treatment of diabetic wounds involves local and systemic measures.112 Achievement of adequate blood sugar levels is very impor-tant. Most diabetic wounds are infected, and eradication of the infectious source is paramount to the success of healing.
Gram stain, culture, or broad-range bacterial PCR may lead to microbiologic diagnosis. The pleural fluid should be cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses. If the fluid is grossly purulent, removal reduces the patient’s toxicity and associated discomfort and may facilitate more rapid recovery. If the accumulation is large and impairs the ability of the lung to expand, removal of the fluid improves pulmonary mechanics and gas exchange. Frontal and lateral radiographs are required to localize disease and adequately visualize retrocardiac infiltrates and are recommended for diagnosis among hospitalized children, but they are not necessary to confirm the diagnosis in well-appearing outpatients. Although there are characteristic radiographic findings of pneumonia, radiography alone cannot provide a definitive microbiologic diagnosis. Bacterial pneumonia characteristically shows lobar consolidation, or a round pneumonia, with pleural effusion in 10% to 30% of cases (Fig. 110-1).Viral pneumonia characteristically shows diffuse, streaky infiltrates of bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-2) and hyperinflation. Atypical pneumonia, such as with M. pneumoniae and

Figure 110-1 Acute lobar pneumonia of the lingula in a 6-year-old child with high fever, cough, and chest pain. Frontal chest radiograph shows airspace consolidation, which obliterates the silhouette of the heart border on the left. The left hemidiaphragm is mildly elevated as a result of splinting. (From Markowitz RI: Diagnostic imaging. In Jen-son HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 133.) Figure 110-2 Diffuse viral bronchopneumonia in a 12-year-old boy with cough, fever, and wheezing.
In Jen-son HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 133.) Figure 110-2 Diffuse viral bronchopneumonia in a 12-year-old boy with cough, fever, and wheezing. Frontal chest radiograph shows bilateral, perihilar, peribronchial thickening, and shaggy infiltrate. Focal airspace disease representing consolidation or atelectasis is present in the medial portion of the right upper lobe. The findings are typical of bronchopneumonia. (From Markowitz RI: Diagnostic imaging. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 132.) C. pneumoniae, shows increased interstitial markings or bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-3). Chest radiographs may be normal in early pneumonia, with infiltrates appearing during treatment as hydration is restored. Hilar lymphadenopathy is uncommon with bacterial pneumonia but may be a sign of tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, or an underlying malignant neoplasm. Decubitus views or ultrasound should be used to assess size of pleural effusions and whether they are freely mobile. Figure 110-3 Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection (atypical pneumonia) in a 14-year-old boy with malaise, dry cough, and mild shortness of breath for 1 week. Frontal chest radiograph shows a diffuse pattern of increased interstitial markings, including Kerley lines. The heart is normal, and there are no focal infiltrates.
Fever, chills, tachypnea, cough, malaise, pleuritic chest pain, retractions, and apprehension, because of difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, are common in older infants and children. Physical examination findings cannot reliably distinguish viral and bacterial pneumonias, but complete physical examination may help identify other foci of disease or associated findings to suggest an etiology. In general viral pneumonias are associated more often with cough, wheezing, or stridor; fever is less prominent than with bacterial pneumonia. Mucosal congestion and upper airway inflammation suggest a viral infection. Bacterial pneumonias typically are associated with higher fever, chills, cough, dyspnea, and auscultatory findings of lung consolidation. Atypical pneumonia in young infants is characterized by tachypnea, cough, crackles on auscultation, and concomitant (chlamydial) conjunctivitis (infants) may be present. Other signs of respiratory distress include nasal flaring, intercostal and subcostal retractions, and grunting. Asymmetry or shallow breathing may be due to splinting from pain. Hyperexpansion, common in asthma but also frequently accompanying viral lower respiratory infections, may cause a low diaphragm or liver. Poor diaphragmatic excursion may indicate hyperexpanded lungs or an inability for expansion due to a large consolidation or effusion. Dullness to percussion may be due to lobar or segmental infiltrates or pleural fluid. Auscultation may be normal in early or very focal pneumonia, but the presence of localized crackles, rhonchi, and wheezes may help one detect and locate pneumonia. Distant breath sounds may indicate a large, poorly ventilated area of consolidation or pleural fluid. Table 110-1 Etiologic Agents and Empirical Antimicrobial Therapy for Pneumonia in Patients without History of Recent Antibiotic Therapy AGE GROUP COMMON PATHOGENS* (IN APPROXIMATE ORDER OF FREQUENCY) LESS COMMON PATHOGENS OUTPATIENTS† (7–10 DAYS TOTAL DURATION OF TREATMENT) PATIENTS REQUIRING HOSPITALIZATION‡ (10–14 DAYS TOTAL DURATION OF TREATMENT) PATIENTS REQUIRING INTENSIVE CARE*,‡ (10–14 DAYS TOTAL DURATION OF TREATMENT) 1 to 3 months

Amoxicillin or ampicillin if fully immunized for age for S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae type b. Alternatives: cefotaxime or ceftriaxone if not fully immunized or local

S. pneumoniae penicillin resistance is significant, with clindamycin if MRSA suspected Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone plus nafcillin, oxacillin, clindamycin, or vancomycin 3 months to 5 Respiratory syncytial years virus, other respiratory viruses (parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, human metapneumovirus adenoviruses), S. pneumoniae,

H. influenzae (type b,§ nontypable) C. trachomatis, Mycoplasma Amoxicillin plus pneumoniae, Chlamydophila erythromycin, azithromycin, pneumoniae, group A or clarithromycin if atypical streptococcus, Staphylococcus pneumonia suspected aureus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis Ampicillin Alternatives: Cefuroxime or ceftriaxone plus cefotaxime or ceftriaxone if azithromycin, erythromycin or not fully immunized or local clarithromycin with or without

S. pneumoniae penicillin clindamycin or vancomycin resistance is significant, with clindamycin if MRSA suspected; Add erythromycin, azithromycin, or clarithromycin if atypical pneumonia suspected

MRSA, Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Characterized by scattered patchy consolidation centered around bronchioles; often multifocal and bilateral (Fig. 9.4)

B. Caused by a variety of bacterial organisms (Table 9.2)

IV. A. Characterized by diffuse interstitial infiltrates (Fig. 9.5)

B. Presents with relatively mild upper respiratory symptoms (minimal sputum and low fever); 'atypical' presentation

C. Caused by bacteria or viruses (Table 9.3)

V.

A. Seen in patients at risk for aspiration (e.g., alcoholics and comatose patients)

B. Most often due to anaerobic bacteria in the oropharynx (e.g., Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, and Peptococcus)

Fig. 9.4 Bronchopneumonia. A, X-ray appearance. B, Gross appearance. (B, Courtesy of Yale Rosen, MD)

Fig. 9.5 Interstitial pneumonia. A, X-ray appearance. B, Inflammatory infiltrate involving interstitium.
Frontal chest radiograph shows a diffuse pattern of increased interstitial markings, including Kerley lines. The heart is normal, and there are no focal infiltrates. Cold agglutinins were markedly elevated, and the patient responded to erythromycin. This radiographic pattern of reticulonodular interstitial disease is observed in 25% to 30% of patients with pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. (From Baltimore RS: Pneumonia. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 808.) Computed tomography (CT) is used to evaluate serious disease, pleural abscesses, bronchiectasis, and effusion characteristics. Unusual etiologies or recurrent pneumonias require special considerations (Table 110-2). Lung abscesses, pneumatoceles, and empyema all require special management. Pneumonia must be differentiated from other acute pulmonary diseases, including allergic pneumonitis, asthma, and cystic fibrosis; cardiac diseases, such as pulmonary edema caused by heart failure; and autoimmune diseases, such as certain vasculitides and systemic lupus erythematosus. Radiographically pneumonia must be differentiated from lung trauma and contusion, hemorrhage, foreign body aspiration, and sympathetic effusion due to subdiaphragmatic inflammation. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Therapy for pneumonia includes supportive and specific treatment and depends on the degree of illness, complications, and knowledge of the infectious agent likely causing the pneumonia. Most cases of pneumonia in healthy children can be managed on an outpatient basis. However children with hypoxemia, inability to maintain adequate hydration, or moderate to severe respiratory distress should be hospitalized. Hospitalization should be considered in infants under 6 months with suspected bacterial pneumonia, those in whom there is a concern for a pathogen with increased virulence (e.g., methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), or when concern exists about a family’s ability to care for the child and to assess symptom progression.
Treatment of Hyperammonemia

During episodes of symptomatic hyperammonemia, proteinintake is reduced, and intravenous glucose is given in sufficient quantity to suppress catabolism of endogenous protein. Ammonia can be eliminated by use of the alternate pathway agents, sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate, which are excreted in the urine as conjugates of glycine andglutamine. Arginine, which is usually deficient, is supplied.When ammonia levels are very high (>1000 µM) or refractory to therapy, direct removal of ammonia using hemodialysis or hemofiltration, but not peritoneal dialysis, is required.The neurologic status must be followed closely and cerebraledema treated promptly. Despite successful management ofhyperammonemic crises, the long-term outcome for males with severe neonatal OTC deficiency and all children with severe ASL deficiency is guarded. Early liver transplantationhas increased survival, especially in males with severe OTC deficiency. Restriction of dietary protein intake to daily needs is the mainstay of ongoing treatment for urea cycle defects. Crystalline essential amino acids can be supplied in amounts just sufficient to support protein synthesis. Arginine is an essential amino acid when arginine synthesis via the urea cycle is grossly impaired; thus arginine must be supplied except in the case of arginase deficiency. Citrulline needs to be supplied for some urea cycle disorders. For OTC deficiency and carbamoyl phosphate synthase deficiency, treatment with phenylbutyrate (which is metabolized to phenylacetate) prevents accumulation of ammonia. Cystinuria is a disorder of renal tubular transport of cystine, lysine, arginine, and ornithine. Although intestinal transport is affected in some genetic forms, the symptoms are largely due to the renal transport abnormality. The concentration of cystine exceeds its solubility product and results in significant renal stones. Evaluation and diagnosis are based on the pattern of amino acid excretion in the urine. Mutation testing can be done.
Hepatocytes of females with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency express either the normal or the mutant allele due to random X-inactivation and may be unable to remove excess ammonia if mutant cells are predominant. Infants with classic urea cycle defects present at 1–4 days of life with refusal to eat and lethargy progressing to coma and death. Milder enzyme deficiencies present with protein avoidance, recurrent vomiting, migraine, mood swings, chronic fatigue, irritability, and disorientation that can progress to coma. Females with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency can present at time of childbirth due to the combination of involuntary fasting and stress that favors catabolism. The diagnosis requires measurement of plasma ammonia, plasma amino acids, and urine orotic acid, useful for differentiating ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency from carbamyl phosphate synthase-1 and N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency. Hyperammonemia can also be 434e-5 caused by liver disease from any cause and several organic acidemias and fatty acid oxidation defects (the latter two excluded by the analysis of urine organic acids and plasma acylcarnitine profile). Therapy is aimed at stopping catabolism and ammonia production by providing adequate calories (as IV glucose and lipids in the comatose patient) and, if needed, insulin. Excess nitrogen is removed by IV phenylacetate and benzoate (0.25 g/kg for the priming dose and subsequently as an infusion over 24 h) that conjugate with glutamine and glycine, respectively, to form phenylacetylglutamine and hippuric acid, water-soluble molecules efficiently excreted in urine. Arginine (200 mg/kg per day) becomes an essential amino acid (except in arginase deficiency) and should be provided intravenously to resume protein synthesis. If these measures fail to reduce ammonia, hemodialysis should be initiated promptly. Chronic therapy consists of a protein-restricted diet, phenylbutyrate, glycerol phenylbutyrate (a liquid drug better tolerated by most patients), arginine, or citrulline supplements, depending on the specific diagnosis. Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with severe urea cycle defects that are difficult to control medically. Hyperammonemia due to a functional deficiency of glutamine synthase can occur in patients receiving chemotherapy for different malignancies or undergoing solid organ transplants. It can also be seen with hepatic cirrhosis. Several of these patients have been successfully rescued from hyperammonemia using the protocol described above for urea cycle defects.
The plasma ammonia level was found to be 887 µmol/l (normal 5–35 µmol/l). Quantitative plasma amino acid levels revealed a marked elevation of citrulline but not argininosuccinate. 9.3. Which one of the following enzymic activities is most likely to be deficient in this patient? A. Arginase

B. Argininosuccinate lyase

C. Argininosuccinate synthetase

D. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I

E. Ornithine transcarbamylase Correct answer = C. Genetic deficiencies of each of the five enzymes of the urea cycle, as well as deficiencies in N-acetylglutamate synthase, have been described. The accumulation of citrulline (but not argininosuccinate) in the plasma of this patient means that the enzyme required for the conversion of citrulline to argininosuccinate (argininosuccinate synthetase) is defective, whereas the enzyme that cleaves argininosuccinate (argininosuccinate lyase) is functional. 9.4. Which one of the following would also be elevated in the blood of this patient? A. Asparagine

B. Glutamine

C. Lysine

D. Urea

Correct answer = B. Deficiencies of the enzymes of the urea cycle result in the failure to synthesize urea and lead to hyperammonemia in the first few weeks after birth. Glutamine will also be elevated because it acts as a nontoxic storage and transport form of ammonia. Therefore, elevated glutamine accompanies hyperammonemia. Asparagine and lysine do not serve this sequestering role. Urea would be decreased because of impaired activity of the urea cycle. [Note: Alanine would also be elevated in this patient.]
Probenecid increases renal excretion of urate but does not inhibit its production. 2.4. A 1-year-old female patient is lethargic, weak, and anemic. Her height and weight are low for her age. Her urine contains an elevated level of orotic acid. Activity of uridine monophosphate synthase is low. Administration of which of the following is most likely to alleviate her symptoms? A. Adenine

B. Guanine

C. Hypoxanthine

D. Thymidine

E. Uridine

Correct answer = E. The elevated excretion of orotic acid and low activity of uridine monophosphate (UMP) synthase indicate that the patient has orotic aciduria, a very rare genetic disorder affecting de novo pyrimidine synthesis. Deficiencies in one or both catalytic domains of UMP synthase leave the patient unable to synthesize pyrimidines. Uridine, a pyrimidine nucleoside, is a useful treatment because it bypasses the missing activities and can be salvaged to UMP, which can be converted to all the other pyrimidines. Although thymidine is a pyrimidine nucleoside, it cannot be converted to other pyrimidines. Hypoxanthine, guanine, and adenine are all purine bases and cannot be converted to pyrimidines. 2.5. What laboratory test would help in distinguishing an orotic aciduria caused by ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency from that caused by uridine monophosphate synthase deficiency? Blood ammonia level would be expected to be elevated in ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency that affects the urea cycle but not in uridine monophosphate synthase deficiency.
As in all forms of liver disease, valproic acid and other hepatic toxins may cause hepatic coma by further impairing the urea cycle enzymes. Notable are a few cases of inherited hyperammonemia that come to light in childhood or adulthood only after the administration of one of these drugs. Most cases of OTC present in the neonatal period with hyperammonemia but milder forms may appear later in life with episodic symptoms such as stupor, ataxia, and seizures. The other features have been mentioned above. Treatment of the hyperammonemic syndromes The treatment of acute hyperammonemic syndromes is directed at lowering ammonia levels, initially by hemodialysis, exchange transfusions, and administration of phenylacetate and sodium benzoate, which may divert nitrogen from the ureagenesis cycle or act as ammonia scavengers. A report of treatment for 299 patients treated with phenylacetate (or phenylbutyrate) and benzoate showed an overall survival of 84 percent including a large proportion of children who were comatose on admission (see Enns et al). With subsidence of the acute symptoms, a systematic form of management should be undertaken, as outlined by Brusilow and colleagues and by Msall and colleagues Arginine (50 to 150 mg/kg) should be added to the diet, as a deficiency of this substance may be responsible for the mental retardation and skin rashes associated with the native disorder. In more chronic cases, treatment consists of decreasing the ammonium load by the use of dietary protein restriction and by administration of oral antibiotics and lactulose. In infants with inborn errors of ureagenesis, there is a constant danger of recurrent episodes of hyperammonemia and coma, particularly in response to infections. In a few instances, careful management of the metabolic error has resulted in normal psychomotor development. Liver transplantation is curative. These conditions are caused by a deficiency of a-keto acid dehydrogenase, resulting in the accumulation of the branched-chain amino acids leucine, isoleucine, and valine and the corresponding branched-chain a-keto acids, which may be detected in plasma and urine. Detection is part of most newborn screening panels. Maple syrup urine disease may be taken as the prototype. The pattern of inheritance of maple syrup urine disease is autosomal recessive and at least three types have been detected, each with a different genetic locus.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
He reports drinking about 6 beers per day. In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and an HIV test returns with a positive result. What drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmonary tubercu-losis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) would be likely to cause toxicity? Mycobacteria are intrinsically resistant to most antibiotics. Because they grow more slowly than other bacteria, antibiotics that are most active against rapidly growing cells are relatively ineffective. Mycobacterial cells can also be dormant and, thus, resistant to many drugs or killed only very slowly. The lipid-rich mycobacterial cell wall is impermeable to many agents. Mycobacterial species are intracellular pathogens, and organisms residing within macrophages are inaccessible to drugs that penetrate these cells poorly. Finally, mycobacteria are notorious for their ability to develop resistance. Combinations of two or more drugs are required to overcome these obstacles and to prevent emergence of resistance during the course of therapy. The response of mycobacterial infections to chemotherapy is slow, and treatment must be administered for months to years, depending on which drugs are used.
Pulmonary embolus. A large flling defect in the pulmonary artery is evident on pulmonary angiogram. Thrombolysis: Indicated only in cases of massive DVT or pulmonary embolism causing right heart failure and hemodynamic instability (contraindicated in patients with recent surgery or bleeding). DVT prophylaxis: Treat all immobile patients; give SQ heparin, LMWH, intermittent pneumatic compression of the lower extremities (less effective), and early ambulation (most effective). Often asymptomatic, or patients may present with chronic cough, dyspnea, and shortness of breath. Always inquire about smoking and exposure history. Serial CXRs: Determine the location, progression, and extent of the nodule. Chest CT: Determine the nature, extent, and infltrating nature of the nodule. Characteristics favoring carcinoma: Age > 45–50; smoking history; history of malignancy; new or enlarging (unless very rapidly enlarging) lesions; absence of calcifcation or irregular calcifcation; size > 2 cm; irregular margins. Lung nodule clues based on the history:

Recent immigrant: Think TB. From the southwestern United States: Think coccidioidomycosis. From the Ohio River Valley: Think histoplasmosis. Squamous and Small cell cancers are Central lesions. ■Characteristics favoring a benign lesion: Age < 35; no change from old flms; central/uniform/laminated/popcorn calcifcation; size < 2 cm; smooth margins. Surgical resection is indicated for nodules at high risk for malignancy.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161(4 Part 2):S221. Zhang Y, Yew WW: Mechanisms of drug resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2009;13:1320. Zumla A et al: Current concepts—Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2013;368:745. The patient should be started on four-drug therapy with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. He should also be started on antiretroviral therapy for HIV. If a protease-inhibitor-based antiretroviral regimen is used to treat his HIV, rifabutin should replace rifampin because of the serious drug-drug interactions between rifampin and protease inhibitors. If dolutegravir is chosen, it must be administered twice daily due to the interaction with rifampin; alternatively, rifabutin can be used in place of rifampin, and dolutegravir can be dosed once daily. The patient is at increased risk of developing hepatotoxicity from both isoniazid and pyrazinamide given his history of alcohol use. Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, Pharm D

The patient is a 37-year-old African-American man who lives in San Jose, California. He was recently incarcerated near Bakersfield, California and returned to Oakland about 3 months ago. He is currently experiencing one month of severe headache and double vision. He has a temperature of 38.6°C (101.5°F) and the physical exam reveals nuchal rigidity and right-sided sixth cranial nerve palsy. MRI of his brain is normal, and lumbar puncture reveals 330 WBC with 20% eosinophils, protein 75, and glucose 20.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Assessment of the fetal heart rate is the most valuable information regarding fetal viability. Fetal monitoring should initially be assessed with bedside FAST ultrasound to document the heart rate of the fetus; subsequent monitoring should be per-formed with a cardiotocographic device that measures both con-tractions and fetal heart tones (FHTs). Because change in heart rate is the primary response of the fetus to hypoxia or hypo-tension, anything above an FHT of 160 is a concern, whereas bradycardia (FHT of <120) is considered fetal distress. Indica-tions for emergent cesarean section include: (a) severe mater-nal shock or impending death (if the fetus is delivered within 5 minutes, survival is estimated at 70%), (b) uterine injury or significant fetal distress (anticipated survival rates of >70% if FHTs are present and fetal gestational age is >28 weeks).149If possible, a member of the obstetrics team should be present during initial evaluation. Vaginal bleeding can signal early cervical dilation and labor, abruptio placentae, or placenta previa. Amniotic sac rupture can result in prolapse of the umbil-ical cord with fetal compromise. Strong contractions are associ-ated with true labor and should prompt consideration of delivery and resuscitation of the neonate. Focused prenatal history-taking should elicit a history of pregnancy-induced hypertension, ges-tational diabetes, congenital heart disease, preterm labor, or placental abnormalities. Asking the patient when the baby first moved and if she is currently experiencing movement of the fetus is important. Determining fetal age is key for consider-ations of viability. Gestational age may be estimated by noting fundal height, with the fundus approximating the umbilicus at 20 weeks and the costal margin at 40 weeks. Discrepancy in dates and size may be due to uterine rupture or hemorrhage.Initial evaluation for abdominopelvic trauma in pregnant patients should proceed in the standard manner. Ultrasound (FAST) of the abdomen should evaluate the four windows (pericardial, right and left upper quadrant, and bladder) and additionally assess FHTs, fetal movement, and sufficiency of amniotic fluid. DPL can be performed in pregnant women via a supraumbilical, open technique. Trauma radiography of pregnant patients presents a conundrum.
Tx: Etiology specif c.

Cx: Preterm labor, fetal malpresentation, cord prolapse. An AFI < 5 cm on ultrasound. Usually asymptomatic, but IUGR or fetal distress may be present. Etiologies include fetal urinary tract abnormalities (e.g., renal agenesis, GU obstruction), chronic uteroplacental insuff ciency, and ROM. Dx: The sum of the deepest amniotic fuid pocket in all four abdominal quadrants on ultrasound. Tx: Rule out inaccurate gestational dates. Treat the underlying cause if possible. Cx: Associated with a 40-fold ↑ in perinatal mortality. Other complications include musculoskeletal abnormalities (e.g., clubfoot, facial distortion), pulmonary hypoplasia, umbilical cord compression, and IUGR. In this condition, fetal RBCs leak into the maternal circulation, and maternal anti-Rh IgG antibodies form that can cross the placenta, leading to hemolysis of fetal Rh RBCs (erythroblastosis fetalis). There is an ↑ risk among an Rh-women who have had a previous SAB or TAB as well as among those who have undergone a previous delivery with no RhoGAM given. Sensitized Rhmothers with titers > 1:16 should be closely monitored with serial ultrasound and amniocentesis for evidence of fetal hemolysis. In severe cases, initiate preterm delivery when fetal lungs are mature. Prior to delivery, intrauterine blood transfusions may be given to correct a low fetal hematocrit. If the mother is Rh at 28 weeks and the father is Rh  or unknown, give RhoGAM (Rh immune globulin).
However, because the study was carried out in the 1960s, there were inconsistent criteria to accurately assign cause. The contribution of HIE to subsequent neurological disorders is discussed in detail on page 621. The

Preterm delivery at 23-27 weeks 78.9 56.5-110

Breech or face presentation, 3.8 1.6-9.1

Severe birth defect 5.6 8.1n-30.0

Nonsevere birth defect 6.1 3.1-11.8

Time to cry >5 minutes 9.0 4.3-18.8 Obesity 1.2-2 1.1-2.8

Low placental weight 3.6 1.5-8.4

Placental infarction 2.5 1n.2-5.3

Clinical 2.4 1.5-3.8

Histological 1.8 1.2-2.9 alncludes respiratory distress syndrome, meconium aspiration, emergent cesarean or operative vaginal delivery, hypoglycemia, gestational hypertension, hypotension, advanced maternal age, genetic factors, twins, thrombotic states, nighttime delivery, seizures, fetal-growth restriction, male gender, and nulliparity. CI = confidence interval. From Ahlin, 2013; Blair, 2011; Mcintyre, 2013; Moster, 2008; Nelson, 2015; O'Callaghan, 2011; Shatrov, 2010; Takenouchi, 2012; Torfs, 1990; Villamor, 2017; Wu, 2012.

heart tracings have not enhanced predictability (Alirevic, 2017; INFANT Collaborative Group, 2017). Indeed, an abnormal heart rate pattern in fetuses that ultimately develop cerebral palsy may reflect a preexisting neurological abnormality (Phelan, 1994). Because of these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20r17 a,d) has concluded that electronic fetal monitoring does not reduce the incidence of long-term neurological impairment. his is discussed further in Chapter 24 (p. 477). In general, 1-and 5-minute Apgar scores are poor predictors of long-term neurological impairment (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017e). When the 5-minute Apgar score is $3, however, neonatal death or the risk of neurological sequelae rises substantially (Dijxhoorn, 1986; Nelson, 1984). In a Swedish study, 5 percent of such children subsequently required special schooling (Stuart, 2011). In a Norwegian study, the incidence of these low Apgar scores was 0.1 percent in more than 235,000 newborns. lmost a fourth of those with such scores died, and 10 percent of survivors devel oped cerebral palsy (Moster, 2001). Persistence past 5 minutes of these extremely low scores correlates strongly with a higher risk for neurological morbidity and death (Grtinebaum, 2013). his of course is not absolute, and the 2003 Task Force cited a 10-percent risk for cerebral palsy for infants with 10-minute scores of 0 to 3.
Amt] Obstet Gynecol 184:489,t2001

Smith Sc, Baker PN: Placental apoptosis is increased in postterm pregnancies. B]OG 106:861, 1999

Torricelli M, Novembri R, Conti N, et al: Correlation with kisspeptin in postterm pregnancy and apoptosis. Reprod Sci 19(10): 1133, 2012

Trimmer K], Leveno K], Peters MT, et al: Observation on the cause of oligohydramnios in prolonged pregnancy. Am] Obstet Gynecol 163: 1900, 1990

Van del' Ven Aj, van Os MA, Kleinrouweler CE, et al: Midpregnancy cervical length in nulliparous women and its association with postterm delivery and intrapartum cesarean delivery. Am ] Perinatol 33 (1) :40, 2016

Vankayalapati P, Sethna F, Roberts N, et al: Ultrasound assessment of cervical length in prolonged pregnancy: prediction of spontaneous onset of labor and successful vaginal delivery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 31 (3):328, 2008

Walsh ]M, Kandamany N, Shuibhne NN, et al: Neonatal brachial plexus injury: comparison of incidence and antecedents between 2 decades. Amt] Obstet Gynecol 204:324, 201t1. Wenstrom KD, Parsons MT: The prevention of meconium aspiration in labor using amnioinfusion. Obstet Gynecol 73:647, 1989

Wong SF, Hui SK, Choi H, et al: Does sweeping of membranes beyond 40 weeks reduce the need for formal induction of labour? Br] Obstet Gynaecol 109:632, 2002 Wyckof MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: neonatal resuscitation. 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonaty resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 132:5543, 20t15

Yang 5, Platt RW, Kramer MS: Variation in child cognitive ability by week of gestation among healthy term births. Am] Epidemiol 171 :399, 2010

Yang SH, Roh CR, Kim ]H: Transvaginal ultrasonography for cervical assessment before induction of labor. Obstet Gynecol Surv 59:577, 2004

Zizzo AR, Kirkegaard I, Pin borg A, et al: Decline in stillbirths and perinatal mortality after implementation of a more aggressive induction policy in post-date pregnancies: a nationwide register study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(7):862, 2017

FETAL GROWTH.
If unsure: Ultrasound-guided transabdominal instillation of indigo carmine dye to check for leakage (unequivocal test). Minimize infection risk; do not perform digital vaginal exams on women who are not in labor or for whom labor is not planned immediately. Check fetal heart tracing, maternal temperature, WBC count, and uterine tenderness for evidence of chorioamnionitis. Depends on GA and fetal lung maturity. Term: First check GBS status and fetal presentation; then labor may be induced or the patient can be observed for 24–72 hours. > 34–36 weeks’ gestation: Labor induction may be considered. < 32 weeks’ gestation: Expectant management with bed rest and pelvic rest. Antibiotics: Given to prevent infection and to prolong the latency period in the absence of infection. Antenatal corticosteroids (e.g., betamethasone or dexamethasone × 48 hours): Can be given to promote fetal lung maturity in the absence of intra-amniotic infection prior to 32 weeks’ GA. If signs of infection or fetal distress develop, give antibiotics (ampicillin and gentamicin) and induce labor. Preterm labor and delivery, chorioamnionitis, placental abruption, cord prolapse. Defned as onset of labor between 20 and 37 weeks’ gestation. Occurs in > 10% of all U.S. pregnancies and is the 1° cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Risk factors include multiple gestation, infection, PROM, uterine anomalies, previous preterm labor or delivery, polyhydramnios, placental abruption, poor maternal nutrition, and low SES. Most patients have no identifiable risk factors.
(Courtesy of humpath.com)

Growth Adaptations, Cellular Injury, and Cell Death 2. Extrinsic receptor-ligand pathway i. FAS ligand binds FAS death receptor (CD95) on the target cell, activating caspases (e.g., negative selection of thymocytes in thymus). ii. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) binds TNF receptor on the target cell, activating caspases. 3. Cytotoxic CDs+ T cell-mediated pathway i. Perforins secreted by CDs+ T cell create pores in membrane of target cell. ii. Granzyme from CDS+ T cell enters pores and activates caspases. iii. CDs+ T-cell killing ofvirally infected cells is an example. I. BASIC PRINCIPLES

A. Free radicals are chemical species with an unpaired electron in their outer orbit. B. Physiologic generation of free radicals occurs during oxidative phosphorylation. 1.
[A good, comprehensive overview of cell plasticity and stemness.] http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

Cell Injury, Cell Death, and Adaptations

Other Pathways of Cell Death

The field of pathology is devoted to understanding the causes of disease and the changes in cells, tissues, and organs that are associated with disease and give rise to the presenting signs and symptoms in patients. There are two important terms that students will encounter throughout their study of pathology and medicine:

Etiology refers to the underlying causes and modifying factors that are responsible for the initiation and progression of disease. It is now clear that many common diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes, and cancer, are caused by a combination of inherited genetic susceptibility and various environmental triggers. Elucidating the genetic and environmental factors underlying diseases is a major theme of modern medicine. Pathogenesis refers to the mechanisms of development and progression of disease, which account for the cellular and molecular changes that give rise to the specific functional and structural abnormalities that characterize any particular disease. Thus, etiology refers to why a disease arises and pathogenesis describes how a disease develops (

Fig. 2.1

Defining the etiology and pathogenesis of disease not only is essential for understanding disease but also is the basis for developing rational treatments and effective preventive measures. Thus, pathology provides the scientific foundation for the practice of medicine. To render diagnoses and guide therapy in clinical practice, pathologists identify changes in the gross or microscopic appearance (morphology) of cells and tissues, and biochemical alterations in body fluids (such as blood and urine). Pathologists also use a variety of morphologic, molecular, and other techniques to define the biochemical, structural, and functional changes that occur in cells, tissues, and organs in response to injury. We begin, in this chapter, with a discussion of cellular abnormalities induced by a variety of internal (e.g., genetic) and external (e.g., environmental) abnormalities and stresses. Cells actively interact with their environment, constantly adjusting their structure and function to accommodate changing demands and extracellular stresses. The intracellular milieu of cells is normally tightly regulated such that it remains fairly constant, a state referred to as homeostasis. As cells encounter physiologic stresses (such as increased workload in the heart) or potentially injurious conditions (such as nutrient deprivation), they can undergo adaptation, achieving a new steady state and preserving viability and function.
When the gut barrier is intact, either antigens do not transverse the gut epithelium or, when pathogens are present, a self-limited, protectiveMALTimmuneresponse eliminates the pathogen(Fig.372e-9). However, when the gut barrier breaks down, immune responses to commensal flora antigens can cause inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn’s disease and, perhaps, ulcerative colitis (Fig. 372e-9) (Chap. 351). Uncontrolled MALT immune responses to food antigens, such as gluten, can cause celiac disease (Chap. 351). The process of apoptosis (programmed cell death) plays a crucial role in regulating normal immune responses to antigen. In general, a wide variety of stimuli trigger one of several apoptotic pathways to eliminate microbe-infected cells, eliminate cells with damaged DNA, or eliminate activated immune cells that are no longer needed (Fig. 372e-10). The largest known family of “death receptors” is the TNF receptor (TNF-R) family (TNFR1,TNF-R2,Fas[CD95],deathreceptor3[DR3],deathreceptor4[DR4; TNF-related apoptosis-including ligand receptor 1, or TRAIL-R1], and death receptor 5 [DR5, TRAIL-R2]); their ligands are all in the TNF-α family. Binding of ligands to these death receptors leads to a signaling cascade that involves activation of the caspase family of molecules that leads to DNA cleavage and cell death. Two other pathways of programmed cell death involve nuclear p53 in the elimination of cells with abnormal DNA and mitochondrial cytochrome c to induce cell death in damaged cells (Fig. 372e-10). A number of human diseases have now been described that result from, or are associated with, mutated apoptosis genes (Table 372e-14). These include mutations in the Fas and Fas ligand genes in autoimmune and lymphoproliferation syndromes, and multiple associations of mutations in genes in the apoptotic pathway with malignant syndromes. Several responses by the host innate and adaptive immune systems to foreign microbes culminate in rapid and efficient elimination of microbes.
Endonucleases break down DNA. D. Caspases are activated by multiple pathways. 1. Intrinsic mitochondrial pathway i. Cellular injury, DNA damage, or decreased hormonal stimulation leads to inactivation of Bcl2. ii. Lack of Bcl2 allows cytochrome c to leak from the inner mitochondrial matrix into the cytoplasm and activate caspases. Fig. 1.9 Fat necrosis of peri-pancreatic adipose Fig. 1.10 Fibrinoid necrosis of vessel. Fig. 1.11 Apoptosis. tissue. (Courtesy of humpath.com)

Growth Adaptations, Cellular Injury, and Cell Death 2. Extrinsic receptor-ligand pathway i. FAS ligand binds FAS death receptor (CD95) on the target cell, activating caspases (e.g., negative selection of thymocytes in thymus).
Defects in the early components of the classical pathway predominantly affect the processing of immune complexes (see Section 10-20) and the clearance of apoptotic cells, leading to immune-complex disease. Deficiency of mannose-binding lectin (MBl), the recognition molecule of the mannose-binding lectin pathway, is associated with bacterial infections, mainly in early childhood. Defects in the membrane-attack components are associated only with susceptibility to strains of Neisseria species, the causative agents of meningitis and gonorrhea, implying that the effector pathway is important chiefly in defense against these organisms. dendritic cells). This results in heightened susceptibility to intracellular bacteria, particularly atypical Mycobacterium spp., without the myeloproliferative syndrome seen in patients with the autosomal recessive variant. and tissue damage. The diseases discussed so far are mainly due to disturbances of the adaptive immune system. In the next few sections we look at some immunodeficiency diseases that affect cells and molecules of the innate immune system. We start with the complement system, which can be activated by any of three pathways that converge on the cleavage and activation of complement component C3, allowing it to bind covalently to pathogen surfaces, where it acts as an opsonin (discussed in Chapter 2). Not surprisingly, the spectrum of infections associated with complement deficiencies overlaps substantially with that seen in patients with deficiencies in antibody production. In particular, there is increased susceptibility to extracellular bacteria that require opsonization by antibody and/or complement for efficient clearance by phagocytes (Fig. 13.11). Defects in the activation of C3 by any of the three pathways, as well as defects in C3 itself, are associated with increased susceptibility to infection by a range of pyogenic bacteria, including S. pneumoniae, emphasizing the role of C3 as a central effector that promotes the phagocytosis and clearance of capsulated bacteria. In contrast, defects in the membraneattack components of complement (C5C9) downstream of C3 activation have more limited effects, and result almost exclusively in susceptibility to Neisseria species. A similar susceptibility to Neisseria species is found in patients with defects in the alternative complement pathway components factor D and properdin, indicating that defense against these bacteria, which can survive intracellularly, is largely mediated via antibodyindependent extracellular lysis by the membraneattack complex. Data from largepopulation studies in Japan, where endemic N. meningitidis infection is rare, show that the risk each year of infection with this organism is approximately 1 in 2,000,000 to a normal person.
To be a palindrome, both strands must have the same sequence when read in the 5′→3′ direction. Thus, the complement of 5′-AAGCTT-3′ is also 5′-AAGCTT-3′. 4.2. An Ashkenazi Jewish couple has their 6-month-old son evaluated for listlessness, poor head control, and a fixed gaze. Tay-Sachs disease, an autosomal-recessive disease of lipid degradation, is diagnosed. The couple also has a daughter. The family’s pedigree is shown to the right, along with Southern blots of a restriction fragment length polymorphism very closely linked to the gene for hexosaminidase A, which is defective in Tay-Sachs disease. Which of the statements below is most accurate with respect to the daughter? A. She has a 25% chance of having Tay-Sachs disease. B. She has a 50% chance of having Tay-Sachs disease. C. She has Tay-Sachs disease. D. She is a carrier for Tay-Sachs disease. E. She is homozygous normal.
Uses three-finger (immature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (nonspecif c). Waves bye-bye; plays pat-a-cake. 12 months Cruises (11 months); walks alone. Uses two-finger (mature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (specif c). Imitates actions; separation anxiety. 15 months Walks backward. Uses cup. Uses 4–6 words. Temper tantrums. 18 months Runs; kicks a ball. Builds tower of 2–4 cubes. Names common objects. May start toilet training.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Types of mendelian inheritance include autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked, and Y-linked. Other monogenic inheritance patterns, described subsequently, include mitochondrial inheritance, uniparental disomy, imprinting, and trinucleotide repeat expansion-also termed anticipation. By age 25, approximately 0.4 percent of the population exhibits an abnormality attributed to a monogenic disorder, and 2 percent will have at least one such disorder during their lifetime (Table 13-3). When considering inheritance, it is the phenotype that is dominant or recessive, not the genotype. With a dominant disease, the normal gene may direct the production of normal protein, but the phenotype is abnormal because it is determined by protein produced by the abnormal gene. With a recessive disease, a heterozygous carrier may produce detectable levels of an abnormal gene product but have no features of the condition because the phenotype is directed by the product of the normal co-gene. For example, erythrocytes from carriers of sickle-cell anemia contain approximately 30 percent hemoglobin S, but because the other 70 percent is hemoglobin A, these cells do not usually sickle in vitro. Genetic heterogeneiy explains how diferent genetic mechanisms can result in the same phenotype. Locus heterogeneiy indicates

TABLE 13-3. Selected Monogenic (Mendelian) Disorders that a speciic disease phenotype can be caused by mutations in diferent genetic loci. It also explains why some diseases appear to follow more than one type of inheritance. An example is retinitis pigmentosa, which may develop following mutations in at least 35 diferent genes or loci and may result in autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked forms. Alelic heterogeneiy describes how diferent mutations of the same gene may afect presentation of a particular disease. For example, although only one gene has been associated with cystic ibrosis-the cystic ibrosis conductance transmembrane regulator gene-more than 2000 mutations in this gene have been described and result in variable disease severity (Chaps. 14 and 51, pp.
Incompatibility for the major blood group antigens A and B is the most common cause of hemolytic disease in newborns, but it does not cause appreciable hemolysis in the fetus. Approxi mately 20 percent of newborns have ABO blood group incom patibility, yet only 5 percent are afected clinically. And in such cases, the resulting anemia is typically mild. The condition difers from CDE incompatibility in several respects. First, ABO incompatibility is often seen in firstborn neonates, whereas sensitization to other blood group antigens is not. This is because most group 0 women have developed antiA and anti-B isoagglutinins before pregnancy from exposure to bacteria displaying similar antigens. Second, ABO alloimmunization rarely becomes more severe in successive pregnancies. Last, ABO incompatibility is considered a pediatric diseaserarely of obstetrical concern. his is because most anti-A and anti-B antibodies are IgM and do not cross the placenta. Fetal red cells also have fewer A and B antigenic sites than adult cells and are thus less immunogenic. Consequently, fetal surveillance and early delivery are not indicated in pregnancies with prior ABO incompatibility. Careful neonatal observation is essential, however, because hyperbilirubinemia may require treatment with phototherapy or occasionally transfusion (Chap. 33, p. 626). • Management of the Alloimmunized

An estimated 25 to 30 percent of fetuses from D-alloimmunized pregnancies will have mild-to-moderate hemolytic anemia. And without treatment, up to 25 percent will develop hydrops (Tannirandorn, 1990).
BM] 3:e002490, 20o13

Van den Veyver lB, Moise K]: Fetal RhO typing by polymerase chain reaction in pregnancies complicated by rhesus alloimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 88:1061, 1996

Van Kamp IL, lumper F], Bakkum RS, et al: he severity of immune fetal hydrops is predictive of fetal outcome after intrauterine treatment. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 185:668,o2001 Vivanti A, Benachi A, Huchet FX, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of fetal rhesus 0 genotyping using cell-free fetal DNA during the first trimester of pregnancy. Am] Obstet GynecoIo215:606.e1, 2016 Weiner CP, Pelzer GO, Heilskov], et al: he efect of intravascular transfusion on umbilical venous pressure in anemic fetuses with and without hydrops. Amo] Obstet Gynecol 161:1498, 1989

Weinstein L: Irregular antibodies causing hemolytic disease of the newborn: a continuing problem. Clin Obstet Gynecol 25(2):321, 1982

Welsh K], Bai Y, Education Committee of the Academy of Clinical Laboratory Physicians and Scientists: Pathology consultation on patients with a large h immune globulin dose requirement. Amo] Clin Pathol 145: 44, 2016

Woelfer B, Schuchter K, ]anisiw M, et al: Postdelivery levels of anti-D IgG prophylaxis in mothers depend on maternal body weight. Transfusion 44:512, 2004

Wylie B], D'Alton ME: Fetomaternal hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 115(5): 1039,o2010

Wyszynski OF, Carmen J, Cantor AB, et al: Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. ] Pregnancy 2016:8297407,o2016

Zimmerman R, Carpenter R] ]r, Durig P, et al: Longitudinal measurement of peak systolic velocity in the fetal middle cerebral artery for monitoring pregnancies complicated by red cell alloimmunization: a prospective multicenter trial with intention-to-treat. B]OG ):746,o2002

Zipursky A, Bhutani VK: Impact of Rhesus disease on the global problem of bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 20(1):2,o2015

Zwiers C, Lindenburg IT, Klumper F], et al: Complications of intrauterine intravascular blood transfusion: lessons learned ater 1678 procedures. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(2):180, 2017

MEDICAL THERAPY ....e.....e..e.... ...e......e...e..315

SURGICAL THERAPY ..e........e.... ...e....e..e..e... 318

OPEN FETAL SURGERY .....e....e..e.=...........e...319 FETOSCOPIC SURGERY ...........e.........e...... 321

PERCUTANEOUS PROCEDURESe. . .. .............. 324

EX-UTERO INTRAPARTUM TREATMENT ............e. 327

Minor grades of hydramnios rarey require active treatment.
Prenat Diagn 27(7):641, 2007

Garratty G, Glynn SA, McEntire R, et al: ABO and Rh(D) phenotype frequencies of diferent racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Transfusion 44(5):703, 2004

Giacoia GP. Severe fetomaternal hemorrhage: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 52:372, 1997

Giannina G, Moise K] ]r, Dorman K: A simple method to estimate the volume for fetal intravascular transfusion. Fetal Diagn Ther 13:94, 1998

Goa S, Mimura K, Kakigano A, et al: Normalisation of angiogenic imbalance after intra-uterine transfusion for mirror syndrome caused by parvovirus B19. Fetal Diagn her 6,o2013

Hachisuga K, Hidaka N, Fujita Y, et al: Can we predict neonatal thrombocytopenia in ofspring of women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura? Blood 49(4):259,o2014

Hackney ON, Knudtson E], Rossi KQ, et al: Management of pregnancies complicated by anti-c isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 103:24, 2004 Heinonen S, Ruynamen M, Kirkinen P: Etiology and outcome of second trimes ter nonimmunological fetal hydrops. Scando] Obstet Gynecol 79: 15, 2000

Howard H, Mardew V, McFadyen I, et al: Consequences for fetus and neonate of maternal red cell allo-immunization. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonat Ed 78:F62, 1998

Johnson ]A, MacDonald K, Clarke G, et al: No. 343-Routine non-invasive prenatal prediction of fetal RHO genotype in Canada: the time is here. ] Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(5):366, 2017

Kamphuis MM, Paridaans N, Porcelijn L, et al: Screening in pregnancy for fetal or neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia: systematic review. B]OG 117(1o1):1335,o2010

Kleihauer B, Braun H, Betke K: Demonstration of fetal hemoglobin in erythrocytes of a blood smear. Klin Wochenschr 35(12):637, 1957

Knight M, Pierce M, Allen 0, et al: The incidence and outcomes of fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia: a UK national study using three data sources. Br] HaematoIo152(4):460, 2011 Koelewijn ]M, Vrijkotte TG, van der Schoot CE, et al: Efect of screening for red cell antibodies, other than anti-D, to detect hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn: a population study in the Netherlands.
The diagnosis of fetal-maternal hemorrhage is confirmed by the Kleihauer-Betke acid elution test. Pink fetal RBCs are observed and counted in the mother’s peripheral blood smear because fetal hemoglobin is resistant to acid elution; adult hemoglobin is eluted, leaving discolored maternal cells (patients with sickle cell anemia or hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin may have a false-positive result, and ABO incompatibility may produce a false-negative result). Hemolysis in utero resulting from any cause may produce a spectrum of clinical manifestations at birth. Severe hydropswith anasarca, heart failure, and pulmonary edema may prevent adequate ventilation at birth, resulting in asphyxia. Infantsaffected with hemolysis in utero have hepatosplenomegaly andpallor and become jaundiced within the first 24 hours afterbirth. Less severely affected infants manifest pallor and hepatosplenomegaly at birth and become jaundiced subsequently.Patients with ABO incompatibility often are asymptomaticand show no physical signs at birth; mild anemia with jaundicedevelops during the first 24 to 72 hours of life. Because hydrops, anemia, or jaundice are secondary to many diverse causes of hemolysis, a laboratory evaluation is needed in all patients with suspected hemolysis. A complete blood count, blood smear, reticulocyte count, blood type, and direct Coombs test (to determine the presence of antibody-coated RBCs) should be performed in the initial evaluation of all infants with hemolysis. Reduced hemoglobin levels, reticulocytosis, and a blood smear characterized by polychromasia and anisocytosis are expected with isoimmune hemolysis. Spherocytes commonly are observed in ABO incompatibility. The determination of the blood type and the Coombs test identify the responsible antigen and antibody in immunologically mediated hemolysis. In the absence of a positive Coombs test and blood group differences between the mother and fetus, other causes of non-immune hemolysis must be considered. RBC enzyme assays, hemoglobin electrophoresis, or RBC membrane tests (osmotic fragility, spectrin assay) should be performed. Internal hemorrhage also may be associated with anemia, reticulocytosis, and jaundice when the hemorrhage reabsorbs; ultrasound evaluation of the brain, liver, spleen, or adrenal gland may be indicated when nonimmune hemolysis is suspected. Shock is more typical in patients with internal hemorrhage, whereas in hemolytic diseases, heart failure may be seen with severe anemia.
• Management of the Alloimmunized

An estimated 25 to 30 percent of fetuses from D-alloimmunized pregnancies will have mild-to-moderate hemolytic anemia. And without treatment, up to 25 percent will develop hydrops (Tannirandorn, 1990). If alloimmunization is detected and the titer is below the critical value, the titer is generally repeated every 4 weeks for the duration of the pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016). Importantly, if a prior pregnancy was complicated by alloimmunization, serial titer assessment is not indicated, and the pregnancy is assumed to be at risk regardless of titer. Management of such pregnancies is discussed subsequently. In any pregnancy in which an antibody titer has reached a critical value, there is no beneit to repeating it. The pregnancy is at risk even if the titer drops, and further evaluation is still required. Up to 40 percent of D-negative pregnant women carry a D-negative fetus. he presence of anti-D antibodies relects maternal sensitization but does not indicate whether the fetus is D-positive. If a woman became sensitized in a prior pregnancy, her antibody titer might rise to high levels during the current pregnancy even if the current fetus is D-negative, due to an amnestic response. In a non-Hispanic white couple in which the woman is D-negative, there is an 85-percent chance that the man is D-positive. But, in 60 percent of these cases, he will be heterozygous at the D-Iocus. And, if he is heterozygous, then half of his children will be at risk for hemolytic disease. Transfusion history is relevant. Alloimmunization to a red cell transfusion in the past, and if that antigen is not present on paternal erythrocytes, the pregnancy is not at risk.
Monitor the patient’s hematocrit and BP and treat with IV hydration, transfusion, IV PPIs, endoscopy, and surgery as needed for complications. If perforation is likely, emergent surgery is indicated. Pharmacologic:

Involves protecting the mucosa, decreasing acid production, and eradicating H. pylori infection. Treat mild disease with antacids or with sucralfate, bismuth, and misoprostol (a prostaglandin analog) for mucosal protection. PPIs or H2 receptor antagonists may be used to ↓ acid secretion. Patients with confirmed H. pylori infection should receive triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole). Discontinue use of exacerbating agents. Patients with recurrent or severe disease may require chronic symptomatic therapy. Endoscopy and surgery:

Patients with symptomatic gastric ulcers for > 2 months that are refractory to medical therapy should have either endoscopy or an upper GI series with barium to rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. Refractory cases may require a surgical procedure such as parietal cell vagotomy (the most selective and preferred surgical approach). Hemorrhage (posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduodenal artery), gastric outlet obstruction, perforation (usually anterior ulcers), intractable pain. ■A rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duodenum and/or pancreas that lead to oversecretion of gastrin. ■↑ gastrin results in the production of high levels of gastric acid by the gastric mucosa, leading to recurrent/intractable ulcers in the stomach and duodenum (may occur more distally). In 20% of cases, gastrinomas are associated with MEN 1 (pancreas, pituitary, and parathyroid tumors). Hx/PE: Patients may present with unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain as well as with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, and GI bleeding.
Consider dobutamine infusion for persistent hypotension after appropriate resuscitation and use of vasopressor agents.Steroids: Consider intravenous hydrocortisone (dose <300 mg/day) for adult septic shock when hypotension responds poorly to fluids and vasopressors.Other Supportive TherapyBlood product administration: Transfuse red blood cells when hemoglobin decreases to <7.0 g/dL in the absence of extenuating circumstances (e.g., myocardial ischemia, hemorrhage). It is not necessary to use fresh frozen plasma to correct INR abnormalities in the absence of bleeding. Consider prophylactic transfusion of platelets when counts are less than 10,000/mL in the absence of bleeding, <20,000/mL if there is a risk of bleeding, and <50,000 in the setting of active bleeding or need for procedure.Mechanical ventilation: Target an initial tidal volume of 6 mL/kg body weight and plateau pressure of <30 cm H2O in patients with acute lung injury. Use PEEP to avoid lung collapse. Adopt a conservative fluid strategy. In the setting of sepsis-induced ARDS with PaO2/FiO2 ratio <150, use prone ventilation over continued supine position or high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. Use a weaning protocol to evaluate the potential for discontinuing mechanical ventilation. Pulmonary artery catheter placement is not indicated for routine monitoring.Sedation: Minimize sedation using specific titration endpoints.Glucose control: Use protocolized approach to blood glucose management targeting upper blood glucose target of 180 mg/dL.Prophylaxis: Use stress ulcer (proton pump inhibitor or H2 blocker) and deep venous thrombosis (low-dose unfractionated or fractionated heparin) prophylaxis.Limitation of support: Discuss advance care planning with patients and families and set realistic expectations.Data from Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016, Intensive Care Med. 2017 Mar;43(3):304-377.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17601/03/19   4:46 PM 177SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6starting antibiotics so that appropriate de-escalation of therapy can take place when results return, but only if doing so does not delay the initiation of treatment.In patients who require vasopressor therapy, the first-line agent should be norepinephrine. This can be augmented with vasopressin, if needed, to achieve MAP ≥65 mmHg. It is impor-tant to titrate therapy based on other parameters such as mixed venous oxygen saturation and plasma lactate levels to reduce the risk of vasopressor-induced perfusion deficits. Patients who have persistently poor perfusion despite adequate fluid resus-citation may require addition of inotropic agents (epinephrine, dobutamine) or adjunctive therapy with low-dose corticoste-roids (hydrocortisone 200 mg/day).86Patients with acute lung injury associated with sepsis should receive mechanical ventilation with tidal volumes of 6 mL/kg and pulmonary airway plateau pressures of ≤30 cm H2O. Finally, red blood cell transfusion should be reserved for patients with hemoglobin of <7 g/dL, with a more liberal trans-fusion strategy reserved for those patients with severe coronary artery disease, ongoing blood loss, or severe hypoxemia.86Resistant OrganismsPenicillin was first available for widespread clinical use in the 1940s, and within a year resistant strains of S aureus had emerged. There are two major factors responsible for antibiotic resistance. First, there may be a genetic component innate to an organism that prevents the effect of a particular antibiotic.
Studies have shown that a Blatchford score of 1 or less, or a Rockall score of 2 or less, identifies patients who are very unlikely to be suffering from life-threatening upper GI bleeding. The shorter modified Blatchford score may be just as useful (BUN, Hgb, pulse, BP; maximal score 16).111 High-risk patients benefit from endoscopic therapy to stop the bleeding, while low-risk patients with low-risk lesions can be promptly discharged and treated as outpatients. The most common endoscopic hemostatic modalities used are injection with epinephrine and electrocautery. In a case with exposed vessel, mechanical hemostasis using clips is useful to control the bleeding.112 Biopsy should be performed to evaluate for H pylori infection. Persistent bleeding or rebleeding after endo-scopic therapy is an indication for repeat endoscopic treatment. Surgery should be considered after two endoscopic failures. Elderly patients and patients with multiple comorbidities do not tolerate repeated episodes of hemodynamically significant hemorrhage, and they may benefit from early elective opera-tion after initially successful endoscopic treatment, especially if they have a high-risk ulcer.Planned surgery under controlled circumstances often yields better outcomes than emergent surgery. Deep bleeding ulcers on the posterior duodenal bulb or lesser gastric curvature are high-risk lesions because they often erode large arteries less amenable to nonoperative treatment, and early operation should be considered.Perforated peptic ulcer usually presents as an acute abdo-men. The patient can often give the exact time of onset of the excruciating abdominal pain. Initially, a chemical peritonitis develops from the gastric and/or duodenal secretions, but within hours a bacterial peritonitis supervenes. The patient is in obvi-ous distress, and the abdominal examination shows peritoneal signs. Usually, marked involuntary guarding and rebound ten-derness is evoked by a gentle examination. Upright chest X-ray shows free air in about 80% of patients (Fig. 26-32). Once the diagnosis has been made, the patient is given analgesia and antibiotics, resuscitated with isotonic fluid, and taken to the operating room.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome	3. Pleural effusion	B.	Cardiovascular	1. Hypotension	2. Hypovolemia	3. Sudden death	4. Nonspecific ST-T wave changes	5. Pericardial effusion	C.	Hematologic	1. Hemoconcentration	2. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy	D.	GI hemorrhage	1. Peptic ulcer	2. Erosive gastritis	3. Portal vein or splenic vein thrombosis with varices	E.	Renal	1. Oliguria	2. Azotemia	3. Renal artery/vein thrombosis	F.	Metabolic	1.
Proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) markedly suppress meal-stimulated and nocturnal acid secretion. (Data from Lanzon-Miller S et al: Twenty-four-hour intragastric acidity and plasma gastrin concentration before and during treatment with either ranitidine or omeprazole. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1987;1:239.) For patients with ulcers caused by aspirin or other NSAIDs, the NSAID should be discontinued. If the NSAID must be continued for clinical reasons despite active ulceration, a PPI should be given instead of an H2 antagonist to more reliably promote ulcer healing. For patients with acute peptic ulcers caused by H pylori, H2 antagonists no longer play a significant therapeutic role. H pylori should be treated with a 10to 14-day course of therapy including a PPI and two or three antibiotics (see below). 3. Nonulcer dyspepsia—H2 antagonists are commonly used as over-the-counter agents and prescription agents for treatment of intermittent dyspepsia not caused by peptic ulcer. However, benefit compared with placebo has never been convincingly demonstrated. 4. Prevention of bleeding from stress-related gastritis—

Clinically important bleeding from upper gastrointestinal erosions or ulcers occurs in 1–5% of critically ill patients as a result of impaired mucosal defense mechanisms caused by poor perfusion. Although most critically ill patients have normal or decreased acid secretion, numerous studies have shown that agents that increase intragastric pH (H2 antagonists or PPIs) reduce the incidence of clinically significant bleeding and should be administered to patients who are at high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. However, the optimal agent is uncertain. For patients who are unable to receive enteral medications, either intravenous H2 antagonists or PPIs may be administered.
Common diseases in older adults may have unexpected and atypical clinical features. Most age-related changes in clinical presentation, evolution, and response to treatment are due to interaction of disease pathophysiology with age-related system dysregulation. Some diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) and diabetes, directly affect aging systems and therefore have a devastating impact on frailty and its consequences. Chapter 11 Clinical Problems of Aging

Parkinson’s disease (See also Chap. 449) Most cases of PD begin after the age of 60 years, and the incidence increases up to the age of ∼80 years. Brain aging and PD have long been thought to be related. The nigrostriatal system deteriorates with aging, and many older persons tend to develop a mild form of movement disorder characterized by bradykinesia and stooped posture that mimics mild PD. It is interesting that, in PD, older age at presentation is associated with a more severe and rapid decline in gait, balance, posture, and cognition. These age-related motor and cognitive manifestations of PD tend to be poorly responsive to levodopa or dopamine agonist treatments, especially in the oldest old. In contrast, age at presentation does not correlate with the severity and progression of other classic PD symptoms, such as tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia, nor does it affect the response of these symptoms to levodopa. The pattern of PD features in older persons suggests that late-life PD may reflect a failure of the normal cellular compensatory mechanisms in vulnerable brain regions and that this vulnerability is increased by age-related neurodegeneration, making PD symptoms particularly resistant to levodopa treatment. In addition to motor symptoms, older PD patients tend to have reduced muscle mass (sarcopenia), eating disorders, and poor levels of fitness. Accordingly, PD is a powerful risk factor for frailty and its consequences, including disability, comorbidity, falls, incontinence, chronic pain, and delirium. Use of levodopa and dopaminergic agonists by older PD patients requires complex dosing schedules; therefore, slow-release preparations are preferred. Both dopaminergic and anticholinergic agents increase the risk of confusion and hallucinations.
An enhanced physiologic tremor (EPT) can be seen in up to 10% of the population, often in association with anxiety, fatigue, a metabolic disturbance (e.g., hyperthyroidism, electrolyte abnormalities), drugs (e.g., valproate, lithium), or toxins (e.g., alcohol). Treatment is initially directed to the control of any underlying disorder and, if necessary, can often be improved with a beta blocker. Functional disability Parkinson’s disease Surgery/CDS Combination therapy Levodopa/dopamine agonist/COMT Inhibitor/MAO-B Inhibitor Nonpharmacologic intervention Pharmacologic intervention Neuroprotection —? Rasagiline Yes Levodopa No Dopamine agonists

FIGURE 449-7 Treatment options for the management of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Decision points include: (1) Introduction of a neuroprotective therapy: No drug has been established to have or is currently approved for neuroprotection or disease modification, but there are several agents that have this potential based on laboratory and preliminary clinical studies (e.g., rasagiline 1 mg/d, coenzyme Q10 1200 mg/d, the dopamine agonists ropinirole, and pramipexole). (2) When to initiate symptomatic therapy: There is a trend toward initiating therapy at the time of diagnosis or early in the course of the disease because patients may have some disability even at an early stage, and there is the possibility that early treatment may preserve beneficial compensatory mechanisms; however, some experts recommend waiting until there is functional disability before initiating therapy. (3) What therapy to initiate: Many experts favor starting with a monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitor in mildly affected patients because of the good safety profile of the drug and the potential for a disease-modifying effect; dopamine agonists for younger patients with functionally significant disability to reduce the risk of motor complications; and levodopa for patients with more advanced disease, the elderly, or those with cognitive impairment. Recent studies suggest the early employment of polypharmacy using low doses of multiple drugs to avoid side effects associated with high doses of any one agent. (4) Management of motor complications: Motor complications are typically approached with combination therapy to try and reduce dyskinesia and enhance the “on” time. When medical therapies cannot provide satisfactory control, surgical therapies such as DBS or continuous infusion of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel can be considered. (5) Nonpharmacologic approaches: Interventions such as exercise, education, and support should be considered throughout the course of the disease. CDS, continuous dopaminergic stimulation; COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase. (Adapted from CW Olanow et al: Neurology 72:S1, 2009.) ET is the commonest movement disorder, affecting approximately 5–10 million persons in the United States. It can present in childhood but dramatically increases in prevalence over the age of 70 years.
For such reasons, the benefits of levodopa treatment often begin to diminish after about 3 or 4 years of therapy, regardless of the initial therapeutic response. Although levodopa therapy does not stop the progression of parkinsonism, its early initiation lowers the mortality rate. However, long-term therapy may lead to a number of problems in management such as the on-off phenomenon discussed below. The most appropriate time to introduce levodopa therapy must therefore be determined individually. When levodopa is used, it is generally given in combination with carbidopa (Figure 28–3), a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor, which reduces peripheral conversion to dopamine. Combination treatment is started with a small dose, eg, carbidopa 25 mg, levodopa 100 mg three times daily, and gradually increased. It should be taken 30–60 minutes before meals. Most patients ultimately require carbidopa 25 mg, levodopa 250 mg three or four times daily. It is generally preferable to keep treatment with this agent at a low level (eg, carbidopa-levodopa 25/100 three times daily) when possible, and if necessary, to add a dopamine agonist, to reduce the risk of development of response fluctuations. A controlled-release formulation of carbidopalevodopa is available and may be helpful in patients with established response fluctuations or as a means of reducing dosing frequency. Even more helpful for response fluctuations is a new extended-release formulation (Rytary) that is now available in the USA. A formulation of carbidopa-levodopa (10/100, 25/100, 25/250) that disintegrates in the mouth and is swallowed with the saliva (Parcopa) is available commercially and is best taken about 1 hour before meals. The combination (Stalevo) of levodopa, carbidopa, and a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor (entacapone) is discussed in a later section. Finally, therapy by infusion of carbidopa-levodopa into the duodenum or upper jejunum appears to be safe and is superior to a number of oral combination therapies in patients with advanced levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with response fluctuations. A permanent access tube is inserted via a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in patients who have responded well to carbidopa-levodopa gel administered through a nasoduodenal tube.
Levodopa is rapidly absorbed from the small intestine, but its absorption depends on the rate of gastric emptying and the pH of the gastric contents. Ingestion of food delays the appearance of levodopa in the plasma. Moreover, certain amino acids from ingested food can compete with the drug for absorption from the gut and for transport from the blood to the brain. Plasma concentrations usually peak between 1 and 2 hours after an oral dose, and the plasma half-life is usually between 1 and 3 hours, although it varies considerably among individuals. About two thirds of the dose appears in the urine as metabolites within 8 hours of an oral dose, the main metabolic products being 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl acetic acid (homovanillic acid, HVA) and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). Unfortunately, only about 1–3% of administered levodopa actually enters the brain unaltered; the remainder is metabolized extracerebrally, predominantly by decarboxylation to dopamine, which does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Accordingly, levodopa must be given in large amounts when used alone. However, when given in combination with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor that does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier, the peripheral metabolism of levodopa is reduced, plasma levels of levodopa are higher, plasma half-life is longer, and more dopa is available for entry into the brain (Figure 28–4). Indeed, concomitant administration of a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor such as carbidopa may reduce the daily requirements of levodopa by approximately 75%. The best results of levodopa treatment are obtained in the first few years of treatment. This is sometimes because the daily dose

FIGURE 28–3 Some drugs used in the treatment of parkinsonism. of levodopa must be reduced over time to avoid adverse effects at doses that were well tolerated initially. Some patients become less responsive to levodopa, perhaps because of loss of dopaminergic nigrostriatal nerve terminals or some pathologic process directly involving striatal dopamine receptors. For such reasons, the benefits of levodopa treatment often begin to diminish after about 3 or 4 years of therapy, regardless of the initial therapeutic response. Although levodopa therapy does not stop the progression of parkinsonism, its early initiation lowers the mortality rate.
Finally, therapy by infusion of carbidopa-levodopa into the duodenum or upper jejunum appears to be safe and is superior to a number of oral combination therapies in patients with advanced levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with response fluctuations. A permanent access tube is inserted via a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in patients who have responded well to carbidopa-levodopa gel administered through a nasoduodenal tube. A morning bolus (100–300 mg of levodopa) is delivered via a portable infusion pump, followed by a continuous maintenance dose (40–120 mg/h), with supplemental bolus doses as required. Levodopa can ameliorate many of the clinical motor features of parkinsonism, but it is particularly effective in relieving bradykinesia and any disabilities resulting from it. When it is first introduced, about one third of patients respond very well and one third less well. Most of the remainder either are unable to tolerate the medication or simply do not respond at all, especially if they do not have classic Parkinson’s disease. A. Gastrointestinal Effects

When levodopa is given without a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor, anorexia and nausea and vomiting occur in about 80% of patients. These adverse effects can be minimized by taking the drug in divided doses, with or immediately after meals, and by increasing the total daily dose very slowly. Antacids taken 30–60 minutes before levodopa may also be beneficial. The vomiting has been attributed to stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone located in the brainstem but outside the blood-brain barrier. Fortunately, tolerance to this emetic effect develops in many patients. If not, an additional dose of carbidopa (Lodosyn; 25 mg) taken with the regular carbidopa-levodopa dose is often helpful, even though the usual maximum requirement of carbidopa is 75 mg daily. Domperidone (not available in the USA) may also relieve persistent nausea. Antiemetics such as phenothiazines should be avoided because they reduce the antiparkinsonism effects of levodopa and may exacerbate the disease. When levodopa is given in combination with carbidopa, adverse gastrointestinal effects are much less frequent and troublesome, occurring in less than 20% of cases, so that patients can tolerate proportionately higher doses.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Temperature is reduced by removing clothing, spraying with tepid water, and encouraging evaporative cooling with fanning. For very high body temperatures (eg, >40–41°C [104–105.8°F]), neuromuscular paralysis (eg, with vecuronium) is used to abolish muscle activity quickly. A large number of prescription and nonprescription drugs, as well as a variety of plants and mushrooms, can inhibit the effects of acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors. Some drugs used for other purposes (eg, antihistamines) also have anticholinergic effects, in addition to other potentially toxic actions. For example, antihistamines such as diphenhydramine can cause seizures; tricyclic antidepressants, which have anticholinergic, quinidine-like, and α-blocking effects, can cause severe cardiovascular toxicity. The classic anticholinergic (technically, “antimuscarinic”) syndrome is remembered as “red as a beet” (skin flushed), “hot as a hare” (hyperthermia), “dry as a bone” (dry mucous membranes, no sweating), “blind as a bat” (blurred vision, cycloplegia), and “mad as a hatter” (confusion, delirium). Patients usually have sinus tachycardia, and the pupils are usually dilated (see Chapter 8). Agitated delirium or coma may be present. Muscle twitching is common, but seizures are unusual unless the patient has ingested an antihistamine or a tricyclic antidepressant. Urinary retention is common, especially in older men. Treatment for anticholinergic syndrome is largely supportive. Agitated patients may require sedation with a benzodiazepine or an antipsychotic agent (eg, haloperidol or olanzapine). The specific antidote for peripheral and central anticholinergic syndrome is physostigmine, which has a prompt and dramatic effect and is especially useful for patients who are very agitated. Physostigmine is given in small intravenous doses (0.5–1 mg) with careful monitoring, because it can cause bradycardia and seizures if given too rapidly. Physostigmine should not be given to a patient with serious tricyclic antidepressant overdose because it can aggravate cardiotoxicity, resulting in heart block or asystole.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker. On examination he appeared gray and sweaty. His blood pressure was 74/40 mm Hg (normal range 120/80 mm Hg). An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and demonstrated anterior myocardial infarction. An urgent echocardiograph demonstrated poor left ventricular function. The cardiac angiogram revealed an occluded vessel (Fig. 3.114A,B). Another approach to evaluating coronary arteries in patients is to perform maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT studies (Fig. 3.115A,B). This patient underwent an emergency coronary artery bypass graft and made an excellent recovery. He has now lost weight, stopped smoking, and exercises regularly. When cardiac cells die during a myocardial infarction, pain fibers (visceral afferents) are stimulated. These visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic fibers that innervate the heart and enter the spinal cord between the TI and TIV levels. At this level, somatic afferent nerves from spinal nerves T1 to T4 also enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Cooling core temperatures can be achieved reli-ably with catheter-directed therapy with commercially avail-able devices. Whether this is a worthwhile practice or not may be controversial. Poor data exist in support of treating fevers lower than 42°C in any fashion.147-149Adult trauma patients who underwent induced hypother-mia had poor outcomes in a recent investigation, and thus, this remains a procedure to be avoided. In a similar vein, pediatric patients who were induced did not show any improvement, and therefore, induced hypothermia is not recommended. Compli-cations with induced hypothermia include, but are not limited to, hypokalemia, diuresis, DVT (due to catheter-related vein injury), arrhythmias, shivering, undiagnosed catheter-related bloodstream infection, and bacteremia.150-152Neurologic dysfunction is inconsistent in hypothermia, but a deterioration in reasoning and decision-making skills progresses as body temperature falls, and profound coma (and a flat electroencephalogram) occurs as the temperature drops below 30°C (86°F). The diagnosis of hypothermia is important, so accurate measurement techniques are required to get a true core temperature.Methods used to warm patients include warm air circu-lation over the patient and heated IV fluids, as well as more aggressive measures such as bilateral chest tubes with warm solution lavage, intraperitoneal rewarming lavage, and extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation. A rate of temperature rise of 2°C to 4°C (3.6°F–7.2°F) per hour is considered adequate, but the most common complication for nonbypass rewarming is arrhythmia with ventricular arrest.Hyperthermia. Hyperthermia is defined as a core temperature greater than 38.6°C (101.5°F) and has a host of etiologies (Table 12-19).147 Hyperthermia can be environmentally induced (e.g., summer heat with inability to dissipate heat or control exposure), iatrogenically induced (e.g., heat lamps and medica-tions), endocrine in origin (e.g., thyrotoxicosis), or neurologi-cally induced (i.e., hypothalamic dysfunction).Malignant hyperthermia occurs intraoperatively after exposure to agents such as succinylcholine and some halothane-based inhalational anesthetics. The presentation is dramatic, with rapid onset of increased temperature, rigors, and myoglo-binuria related to myonecrosis. Medications must be discontin-ued immediately and dantrolene administered (2.5 mg/kg every 5 minutes) until symptoms subside. Aggressive cooling meth-ods are also implemented, such as an alcohol bath, or packing in ice. In cases of severe malignant hyperthermia, the mortality rate is nearly 30%.153,154Thyrotoxicosis can occur after surgery due to undiagnosed Graves’ disease. Hallmarks of the syndrome include hyperther-mia (>40°C [104°F]), anxiety, copious diaphoresis, congestive heart failure (present in about one fourth of episodes), tachycar-dia (most commonly atrial fibrillation), and hypokalemia (in up to 50% of patients). The treatment of thyrotoxicosis includes glucocorticoids, propylthiouracil, β-blockade, and iodide (Lugol’s solution) delivered in an emergent fashion. As the name suggests, these patients are usually toxic and require sup-portive measures as well.
Measure central venous pressure (CVP) and give fuid until CVP = 8. Then give pressors (dopamine or norepinephrine). Obtain cultures prior to administration of antibiotics if possible. Bee stings, medication, food allergies. ↑↓↓Give diphenhydramine. If severe, administer 1:1000 epinephrine. a PCWP = pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. b PVR = peripheral vascular resistance. Remove the patient from the cold or windy environment and remove wet clothing. In mild cases, rewarm the patient with blankets or warm water. In more severe cases, the patient may need a heating blanket, warmed oxygen, or warm IV ﬂuids. In unstable patients, invasive rewarming may be necessary (e.g., NG or bladder lavage, pleural lavage, or cardiac bypass). If the patient has frostbite, thaw the affected areas with the same methods. Patients will need narcotic analgesia for thawing. Monitor the ECG for arrhythmias such as bradycardia and slow atrial fibrillation.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Treatment of severe hypothermia should involve resuscitation and rapid warming of core (e.g., lung and stomach) and external surfaces. Fluid resuscitation also is needed to treat hypovolemia seen in many of these infants. Reduced core temperature (32° C to 35° C) in the immediate newborn period often requires only external warming with a radiant warmer, incubator, or both. Exposure to ambient temperatures above the neutral thermal environment results in heat stress and an elevated core temperature. Sweating is uncommon in newborns and may be noted only on the forehead. In response to moderate heat stress, infants may increase their respiratory rate to dissipate heat. Excessive environmental temperatures may result in heatstroke or in hemorrhagic shock encephalopathy syndrome. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Hypocalcemia is common in sick and premature newborns. Calcium levels are higher in cord blood than in maternal blood because of active placental transfer of calcium to the fetus. Fetal calcium accretion in the third trimester approaches 150 mg/kg/24 hr; fetal bone mineral content doubles between 30 and 40 weeks of gestation. All infants show a slight decline of serum calcium levels after birth, reaching a trough level at 24 to 48 hours, the point at which hypocalcemia usually occurs. Total serum calcium levels of less than 7 mg/dL and ionized calcium levels of less than 3 to 3.5 mg/dL are considered hypocalcemia. The etiology of hypocalcemia varies with the time of onset and the associated illnesses of the child. Early neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in the first 3 days of life and is often asymptomatic. Transient hypoparathyroidism and a reduced parathyroid response to the usual postnatal decline of serum calcium levels may be responsible for hypocalcemia in premature infants and infants of diabetic mothers.
Angiography or

Remove from environment. Prevent partial thawing and refreezing. Stabilize core temperature and treat hypothermia. Protect frozen part—no friction or massage. Consider parenteral analgesia and ketorolac. Administer ibuprofen (400 mg PO). Immerse part in 37°–40°C (99°–104°F) (thermometermonitored) circulating water containing an antiseptic soap until distal flush (10–45 min). Encourage patient to gently move part. Gently dry and protect part; elevate; place pledgets between toes, if macerated. If clear vesicles are intact, aspirate sterilely; if broken, debride and dress with antibiotic or sterile aloe vera ointment. Leave hemorrhagic vesicles intact to prevent desiccation and infection. Continue ibuprofen (400 mg PO [12 mg/kg per day] q12h). Address medical or If pain is refractory, reduce Consider tetanus and surgical conditions. water temperature to streptococcal prophylaxis; 35°–37°C (95°–99°F) and elevate part. administer parenteral

Administer hydrotherapy narcotics.
Highly malignant; may seed the subarachnoid space. May cause obstructive hydrocephalus. Surgical resection coupled with radiation and chemotherapy. May arise from the ependyma of a ventricle (commonly the fourth) or the spinal cord. Common in children; low grade. May cause obstructive hydrocephalus. Surgical resection; radiation. Medulloblastoma Ependymoma evaluating skull base lesions and for emergencies (e.g., obstructive hydrocephalus) when an MRI cannot be rapidly acquired. ■Histologic diagnosis via CT-guided biopsy or surgical tumor debulking/ removal. Resection (if possible), radiation, and chemotherapy. Therapy is highly dependent on tumor type, histology, progression, and site (see Table 2.10-10). Corticosteroids can be used to ↓ vasogenic edema and ↓ ICP. Management is often palliative. Seizure prophylaxis can be used in patients who have had a seizure. Symptoms of ↑ ICP:

Headache that is worse in the morning or with recumbency

In NF1, you— spots) NN (2 Neurof bromas) OT (OpTic glioma) FAI (Freckling, Axillary relative with NF1)

NF1 and NF2 are clinically evident by ages 15 and 20, respectively.
Irritability, anorexia, poor school performance, and loss of developmental milestones all may be signs of slow-growing CNS tumors. In young children with open cranial sutures, an increase in head circumference may occur. Optic pathway tumors may lead to loss of visual acuity or visual field defects. Inability to abduct the eye as the result of sixth cranial nerve palsy is a common sign of increased intracranial pressure. Cranial nerve deficits other than sixth nerve palsy suggest involvement of the brainstem. Seizures occur in 20% to 50% of patients with supratentorial tumors; focal weakness or sensory changes also may be seen. Pituitary involvement produces neuroendocrine effects (galactorrhea with prolactinoma, excessive growth with growth hormone secretory tumors, precocious puberty). Cerebellar tumors are associated with ataxia and diminished coordination. A history and physical examination are fundamental for evaluation, which should include a careful neurologic assessment, including visual fields and a funduscopic examination. If an intracranial lesion is suspected, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is currently the examination of choice (Fig. 157-1). Examination of CSF by cytocentrifuge histologic testing is essential to determine the presence of metastatic disease in primitive neuroectodermal tumors, germ cell tumors, and pineal region tumors. A lumbar puncture should not be performed before imaging has been obtained to evaluate for evidence of increased intracranial pressure. If a tumor is

Figure 157-1 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a 9-year-old boy showing a heterogeneously enhancing fourth ventricular mass (arrow). It was resected, and pathology revealed medulloblastoma.
Landolfi and colleagues emphasized the longer survival in adults with pontine glioma (median 54 months) as compared to children. Most of the patients with pontine tumors with which we are familiar proved to have malignant gliomas. Glioma of the Optic Nerves and Chiasm

This tumor, like the brainstem glioma, occurs most frequently during childhood and adolescence. In 85 percent of cases, it appears before the age of 15 years (average 3.5 years), and it is twice as frequent in girls as in boys (Cogan). The initial symptoms are dimness of vision with constricted fields, followed by bilateral field defects of homonymous, heteronymous, and sometimes bitemporal type and progressing to blindness and optic atrophy with or without papilledema. Ocular proptosis from the orbital mass is the other main feature. Hypothalamic signs (adiposity, polyuria, somnolence, and genital atrophy) occur occasionally as a result of proximal tumor extension. CT, MRI, and ultrasonography will usually reveal the tumor, and radiographs will show an enlargement of the optic foramen (greater than 7.0 mm). This finding and the lack of ballooning of the sella or of suprasellar calcification will exclude pituitary adenoma, craniopharyngioma, Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, and sarcoidosis. In adolescents and young adults, the medial sphenoid, olfactory groove, and intraorbital meningiomas (optic nerve sheath meningioma) are other tumors that cause monocular blindness and proptosis. If the entire tumor is prechiasmatic (the less-common configuration), surgical extirpation can be curative. For tumors that have infiltrated the chiasm or are causing regional symptoms and hydrocephalus, partial excision followed by radiation is all that can be offered. Both gliomas and nontumorous gliotic (hamartomatous) lesions of the optic nerves may occur in von Recklinghausen disease; the latter are sometimes impossible to distinguish from optic nerve gliomas and should be followed closely. This is a soft, jelly-like, gray-pink growth that arises from remnants of the primitive notochord. It is located most often within the clivus (from dorsum sellae to foramen magnum) and in the sacrococcygeal region.
Presenta-tion varies widely depending on relevant neuroanatomy. Prognosis depends on histology and anatomy. Modern brain tumor centers use team approaches to CNS tumors, as patients may require a combination of surgery (including newer, more minimally invasive approaches), radiation therapy, chemother-apy, SRS, and research protocol enrollment for studies assessing the efficacy of newer approaches such as immunotherapy. Tumors affecting the peripheral nervous system are discussed in the “Peripheral Nerve” section.Intracranial TumorsIntracranial tumors can cause brain injury from mass effect, dys-function or destruction of adjacent neural structures, swelling, or abnormal electrical activity (seizures). Supratentorial tumors commonly present with focal neurologic deficit, such as contra-lateral limb weakness, visual field deficit, headache, or seizure. Infratentorial tumors often cause increased ICP due to hydro-cephalus from compression of the fourth ventricle, leading to headache, nausea, vomiting, or diplopia. Cerebellar hemisphere or brain stem dysfunction can result in ataxia, nystagmus, or cranial nerve palsies. Infratentorial tumors rarely cause seizures.All patients with symptoms concerning for brain tumor should undergo MRI with and without gadolinium. Gadolinium-based contrast can identify locations of blood-brain barrier break-down of tumors and, when used in conjunction with other MRI sequences, is essential in narrowing the differential diagnosis. Ini-tial management of a patient with a symptomatic brain tumor gen-erally includes dexamethasone for reduction of vasogenic edema, and phenytoin or levetiracetam if the patient has seized. Patients with significant weakness, lethargy, or hydrocephalus should be admitted for observation until definitive care is administered.Metastatic TumorsCerebral metastases are the most common type of intracranial tumor. Prolonged cancer patient survival and improved CNS imaging have increased the likelihood of diagnosing cerebral metastases. The sources of most cerebral metastases are (in decreasing frequency): lung, breast, kidney, GI tract, and mela-noma. Lung and breast cancers account for more than half of cerebral metastases. Metastatic cells usually travel to the brain hematogenously and frequently seed the gray-white junction due to characteristic blood vessel caliber change.
Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may establishthe cause of the alteration of consciousness. Appropriate neuroimaging should be performed to ensure that no added injury islikely to be inflicted with LP. The presence of red blood cells inthe CSF may suggest primary subarachnoid hemorrhage, parenchymal hemorrhage, or hemorrhagic infection (herpes simplexvirus), or it may be due to a traumatic procedure. White bloodcells in the CSF usually denote infectious meningitis or meningoencephalitis but may also be associated with vasculitis or parainfectious syndrome. Elevated CSF protein is seen in patientswith meningeal inflammation or tumors, and abnormal CSFglucose levels are also markers of infection and inflammation. The etiology of altered mental status determines the treatment. Ingestions may necessitate gastric lavage, charcoal administration, forced diuresis, dialysis, or specific antidotes (Chapter 45). Infections are treated with appropriate antibiotics or antiviral agents (Chapter 95). If mental status changes are due to increased ICP, acute medical interventions (osmotic agents, steroids, hyperventilation) must be instituted, emergent neuroimaging performed, and urgent neurosurgical consultation obtained. Structural brain lesions may necessitate medical treatment of increased ICP or surgical excision. The outcome of altered mental status relates to many variables, including etiology. Intoxication typically carries a good prognosis, whereas hypoxia carries a poor prognosis. Other prognostic factors include the duration of coma and the age of the patient; children have better outcomes than adults. Complete recovery from traumatic coma of several days’ duration is possible in children; however, many survivors of prolonged coma are left in a persistent vegetative state or with severe neuropsychiatric disability. Transient, Recurrent Depression of Consciousness

Episodic alteration or depression of consciousness with full recovery is usually due to seizure, migraine, syncope, or metabolic abnormality (hypoglycemia).
Once the distribution of the lesions has been established, the nature of the primary lesion

FIguRE 70-3 A schematic representation of several common primary skin lesions (see Table 70-1). must be determined. Thus, when lesions are distributed on elbows, knees, and scalp, the most likely possibility based solely on distribution is psoriasis or dermatitis herpetiformis (Figs. 70-7 and  70-8, respectively). The primary lesion in psoriasis is a scaly papule that soon forms erythematous plaques covered with a white scale, whereas that of dermatitis herpetiformis is an urticarial papule that quickly becomes a small vesicle. In this manner, identification of the primary lesion directs the examiner toward the proper diagnosis. Secondary changes in skin can also be quite helpful. For example, scale represents excessive epidermis, while crust is the result of a discontinuous epithelial cell layer. Palpation of skin lesions can yield insight into the character of an eruption. Thus, red papules on the lower extremities that blanch with pressure can be a manifestation of many different diseases, but hemorrhagic red papules that do not blanch with pressure indicate palpable purpura characteristic of necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 70-4). The shape of lesions is also an important feature. Flat, round, erythematous papules and plaques are common in many cutaneous diseases. However, target-shaped lesions that consist in part of erythematous plaques are specific for erythema multiforme (Fig. 70-9).
210-1). As the lesion increases in size, it often develops a bright red outer border and partial central clearing. The center of the lesion sometimes becomes intensely erythematous and indurated, vesicular, or necrotic. In other instances, the expanding lesion remains an even, intense red; several red rings are found within an outside ring; or the central area turns blue before the lesion clears. Although EM can be located anywhere, the thigh, groin, and axilla are particularly common sites. The lesion is warm but not often painful. Approximately 20% of patients do not exhibit this characteristic skin manifestation. FIGuRE 210-1 A classic erythema migrans lesion (9 cm in diameter) is shown near the right axilla. The lesion has partial central clearing, a bright red outer border, and a target center. (Courtesy of Vijay K. Sikand, MD; with permission.) Early Infection: Stage 2 (Disseminated Infection) In cases in the United States, B. burgdorferi often spreads hematogenously to many sites within days or weeks after the onset of EM. In these cases, patients may develop secondary annular skin lesions similar in appearance to the initial lesion. Skin involvement is commonly accompanied by severe headache, mild stiffness of the neck, fever, chills, migratory musculoskeletal pain, arthralgias, and profound malaise and fatigue. Less common manifestations include generalized lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly, hepatitis, sore throat, nonproductive cough, conjunctivitis, iritis, or testicular swelling. Except for fatigue and lethargy, which are often constant, the early signs and symptoms of Lyme disease are typically intermittent and changing.
Polycyclic lesions: A configuration of skin lesions formed from coalescing rings or incomplete rings. Pruritus: A sensation that elicits the desire to scratch. Pruritus is often the predominant symptom of inflammatory skin diseases (e.g., atopic dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis); it is also commonly associated with xerosis and aged skin. Systemic conditions that can be associated with pruritus include chronic renal disease, cholestasis, pregnancy, malignancy, thyroid disease, polycythemia vera, and delusions of parasitosis. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

In examining the skin it is usually advisable to assess the patient before taking an extensive history. This approach ensures that the entire cutaneous surface will be evaluated, and objective findings can be integrated with relevant historical data. Four basic features of a skin lesion must be noted and considered during a physical examination: the distribution of the eruption, the types of primary and secondary lesions, the shape of individual lesions, and the arrangement of the lesions. An ideal skin examination includes evaluation of the skin, hair, and nails as well as the mucous membranes of the mouth, eyes, nose, nasopharynx, and anogenital region. In the initial examination, it is important that the patient be disrobed as completely as possible to minimize chances of missing important individual skin lesions and permit accurate assessment of the distribution of the eruption. The patient should first be viewed from a distance of about 1.5–2 m (4–6 ft) so that the general character of the skin and the distribution of lesions can be evaluated. Indeed, the distribution of lesions often correlates highly with diagnosis (Fig. 70-6). For example, a hospitalized patient with a generalized erythematous exanthem is more likely to have a drug eruption than is a patient with a similar rash limited to the sun-exposed portions of the face. Once the distribution of the lesions has been established, the nature of the primary lesion

FIguRE 70-3 A schematic representation of several common primary skin lesions (see Table 70-1). must be determined.
However, target-shaped lesions that consist in part of erythematous plaques are specific for erythema multiforme (Fig. 70-9). Likewise, the arrangement of individual lesions is important. Erythematous papules and vesicles can occur in many conditions, but their arrangement in a specific linear array suggests an external etiology such as allergic contact dermatitis (Fig. 70-10) or primary irritant dermatitis. In contrast, lesions with a generalized arrangement are common and suggest a systemic etiology. As in other branches of medicine, a complete history should be obtained to emphasize the following features: 1. Evolution of lesions a. Site of onset b. Manner in which the eruption progressed or spread c.

d.

Periods of resolution or improvement in chronic eruptions 2. Symptoms associated with the eruption a.

Itching, burning, pain, numbness b. What, if anything, has relieved symptoms c.

Time of day when symptoms are most severe 3. Current or recent medications (prescribed as well as over-thecounter) 4. Associated systemic symptoms (e.g., malaise, fever, arthralgias) 5. 6.
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.) See Chap. 421. AB Figure 436e-12 Papular eruptive xanthomas. A. Multiple, discrete, red-to-yellow papules becoming confluent on the elbow of a white individual with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus; lesions were present on both elbows and buttocks. B. Papular eruptive xanthomas on the elbows and lower arms of an African-American patient. (Source: K Wolff et al: Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.) See Chap. 421. Figure 436e-13 Forms of xanthomas and other lipid deposits frequently seen in familial hypercholesterolemia homozygotes. A. Arcus corneae. B, E, and F. Cutaneous planar xanthomas, which usually have a bright orange hue. C, D, and G. Tuberous xanthomas on the elbows.
Not contraindications to vaccination. Tests to rule out shaken baby syndrome. A neonate has meconium ileus. Bilious emesis within hours after the first feeding. A two-month-old baby presents with nonbilious projectile emesis. What are the appropriate steps in management? The most common 1° immunodeficiency. An infant has a high fever and onset of rash as fever breaks. What is he at risk for? What is the immunodeficiency? A boy has chronic respiratory infections. Nitroblue tetrazolium test is . A child has eczema, thrombocytopenia, and high levels of IgA. A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease.
Treatment of severe hypothermia should involve resuscitation and rapid warming of core (e.g., lung and stomach) and external surfaces. Fluid resuscitation also is needed to treat hypovolemia seen in many of these infants. Reduced core temperature (32° C to 35° C) in the immediate newborn period often requires only external warming with a radiant warmer, incubator, or both. Exposure to ambient temperatures above the neutral thermal environment results in heat stress and an elevated core temperature. Sweating is uncommon in newborns and may be noted only on the forehead. In response to moderate heat stress, infants may increase their respiratory rate to dissipate heat. Excessive environmental temperatures may result in heatstroke or in hemorrhagic shock encephalopathy syndrome. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Hypocalcemia is common in sick and premature newborns. Calcium levels are higher in cord blood than in maternal blood because of active placental transfer of calcium to the fetus. Fetal calcium accretion in the third trimester approaches 150 mg/kg/24 hr; fetal bone mineral content doubles between 30 and 40 weeks of gestation. All infants show a slight decline of serum calcium levels after birth, reaching a trough level at 24 to 48 hours, the point at which hypocalcemia usually occurs. Total serum calcium levels of less than 7 mg/dL and ionized calcium levels of less than 3 to 3.5 mg/dL are considered hypocalcemia. The etiology of hypocalcemia varies with the time of onset and the associated illnesses of the child. Early neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in the first 3 days of life and is often asymptomatic. Transient hypoparathyroidism and a reduced parathyroid response to the usual postnatal decline of serum calcium levels may be responsible for hypocalcemia in premature infants and infants of diabetic mothers.
Erythema toxicum is an erythematous, papular-vesicular rash common in neonates that develops after birth and involves eosinophils in the vesicular fluid. Pustular melanosis, more common in African American infants, may be seen at birth and consists of a small, dry vesicle on a pigmented brown macular base. Erythema toxicum and pustular melanosis are benign lesions but may mimic more serious conditions, such as the vesicular rash of disseminated herpes simplex or the bullous eruption of S. aureus impetigo. Tzanck smear, Gram stain, Wright stain, direct fluorescent antibody stain, polymerase chain reaction for herpes DNA, and appropriate cultures may be needed to distinguish these rashes. Other common characteristic rashes are milia (yellow-white epidermal cysts of the pilosebaceous follicles that are noted on the nose) and miliaria (prickly heat), which is caused by obstructed sweat glands. Edema maybe present in preterm infants, but also suggests hydrops fetalis, sepsis, hypoalbuminemia, or lymphatic disorders. Figure 58-5 Maturity rating as calculated by adding the physical and neurologic scores, calculating the gestational age. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al: New Ballard Score, expanded to include extremely premature infants, J Pediatr 119:417-423, 1991.). The skull may be elongated and molded after a prolonged labor; this resolves 2 to 3 days after birth. The sutures should be palpated to determine the width and the presence of premature fusion or cranial synostosis. The anterior and posterior 4.5 3.5 2.5 1.5 0.5 0 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41

Figure 58-6 Birth weight–specific and estimated gestational age–specific mortality rates. The dashed lines of the figure represent the 10th and 90th percentile weights. The grid lines are plotted by each gestational age and in 250-g weight increments. Each number in the box is the percent mortality rate for the grid defined by gestational age and birth weight range. (From Thomas P, Peabody J, Turnier V, et al: A new look at intrauterine growth and impact of race, attitude, and gender, Pediatrics 106:E21, 2000.)
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Patients most often present in the paroxysmal stage but are most contagious in the catarrhal stage. The classic presentation is an infant < 6 months of age with post-tussive emesis and apnea. Labs show an elevated WBC count with lymphocytosis (often ≥ 70%). Culture is the gold standard. Hospitalize infants < 6 months of age. Give erythromycin × 14 days to patients and close contacts (including day care contacts). Patients should not return to school or day care until five days of antibiotics have been administered or until three weeks have elapsed if no therapy has been initiated. Table 2.13-7 outlines the clinical presentation of common viral exanthems. TABLE 2.13-7. Viral Exanthems

Erythema infectiosum (f fth disease) Parvovirus B19 Prodrome: None; fever is often absent or low grade. Rash: “Slapped-cheek,” erythematous rash. An erythematous, pruritic, maculopapular rash starts on the arms and spreads to the trunk and legs. Worsens with fever and sun exposure. Arthritis, hemolytic anemia, encephalopathy. Congenital infection is associated with fetal hydrops and death.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Situations arise in which critical decisions must be made regarding anticoagulation, further laboratory investigation, and the advice and prognosis to be given to the family. The following are some of the situations encountered by the authors that may be of value to students and residents and to nonspecialists in the field. The Patient With a History of an Ischemic Attack or Small Stroke in the Past

The patient may be functioning normally when examined, but it has been ascertained by the history or radiologic procedures that a stroke or TIA occurred in the past. The problem is what measures should be taken to reduce the risk of further strokes. This is particularly problematic if a surgical procedure is planned. A brief focal TIA, several minutes or less in duration, or many stereotyped spells usually represent severe stenosis of the internal carotid artery on the side of the affected cerebral hemisphere. If the symptoms have occurred recently, these may be forerunners of complete occlusion. If the TIA was far in the past—more than several weeks previously—the immediate risks of occlusion are reduced. The initial approach is to establish the patency of the carotid arteries by ultrasonography or MRA. If there is a reduction in diameter of greater than 70 percent when compared with an adjacent normal segment of vessel, and probably if there is a severely ulcerated but not critically stenotic plaque, carotid surgery (or angioplasty with stenting) is advisable. If a single TIA lasted more than 1 h or the neurologic examination discloses minor signs referable to the region of the hemisphere affected by the TIA, a search for a source of embolus is indicated. Appropriate diagnostic studies include electrocardiography (ECG), a transesophageal echocardiogram, monitoring for cardiac arrhythmia, ultrasonography of the carotid arteries, and a CT or MRI if it has not already been performed. Control of elevated blood pressure and addressing high cholesterol levels are ancillary steps. The mistake is to ignore the potential significance of a prior small stroke or TIA. The Patient With a Recent Stroke That May Not Be Complete

If hours have passed since the first symptoms of stroke but the syndrome is fluctuating or advancing, the basic problem is whether a thrombotic infarction (venous or arterial) will spread and involve more brain tissue; or if embolic, whether the ischemic tissue will become hemorrhagic or another embolus will occur; or if there is an arterial dissection, whether it will give rise to emboli.
The cine movie in the upper panel shows an area of inferior akinesis (green arrows). Magnetic resonance image demonstrates transmural contrast enhancement of the inferior wall (red arrows) and the right ventricle (white arrows), which is consistent with infarction. Imaging the heart 10–15 min after injection of gadolinium allows for the accumulation of gadolinium in infarcted tissue (red arrows), which identifies nonviable infarcted myocardium as bright. Viability assessment, as in this case, can provide guidance for any benefits of invasive coronary intervention. In this case, the inferior wall is nonviable. Apart from the inferior wall infarction (red arrows), there is extensive right ventricular infarction (white arrows). (See Video 271e-7.) Figure 271e-11 Rest myocardial perfusion and metabolism positron emission tomography (PET) scan obtained with 13N-ammonia (perfusion) and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG; glucose metabolism) in a 48-year-old male with a prior myocardial infarction. The rest perfusion

Atlas of Noninvasive Imaging images show a large defect involving the apex, apical segments, and mid-anteroseptal and anterior segments (arrowheads), which has associ-ated increase in glucose uptake (perfusion-metabolic mismatch), reflecting viable but hibernating myocardium throughout the left anterior descending coronary territory. Figure 271e-12 A 70-year-old patient with known cardiac murmur and progressive shortness of breath and a recent episode of syncope. Echocardiography shows severe calcific aortic stenosis. A heavily calcified aortic valve (arrow) is shown in the parasternal long-axis views (top panels) and short-axis view (bottom left). Doppler interrogation shows a peak transaortic velocity of 5.2 m/s consistent with a peak instantaneous gradient of 109 mmHg and a mean gradient of 66 mmHg, and a corresponding aortic valve area of <0.6 cm2 (lower right). Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (See Videos 271e-8, 271e-9, and 271e-10.)
Neuropsychobiology 1998;38:119. Lamotrigine was gradually added to the regimen to a dosage of 200 mg bid. Since then, the patient has been seizure-free for almost 2 years but now comes to the office for a medi-cation review. Gradual discontinuation of levetiracetam is planned if the patient continues to do well for another year, although risk of recurrent seizures is always present when medications are withdrawn. Helge Eilers, MD, & Spencer Yost, MD

An elderly man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and ischemic pain in the lower extremity is scheduled for femoral-to-popliteal artery bypass surgery. He has a history of hyper-tension and coronary artery disease with symptoms of stable angina. He can walk only half a block before pain in his legs forces him to stop. He has a 50-pack-year smoking history but stopped 2 years ago. Medications include atenolol, atorvastatin, and hydrochlorothiazide. The nurse in the preoperative holding area obtains the following vital signs: temperature 36.8°C (98.2°F), blood pressure 168/100 mm Hg, heart rate 78 bpm, oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter 96% while breathing room air, and pain 5/10 in the right lower leg after walking into the hospital. What anesthetic agents will you choose for his anesthetic plan? Why? Does the choice of anesthetic make a difference? For centuries, humans relied on natural medicines and physical methods to control surgical pain. Historical texts describe the sedative effects of cannabis, henbane, mandrake, and opium poppy.
Accurate characterization of cardiac murmurs provides important insight into the natural history of many valvular and congenital heart lesions. Finally, the important role played by the physical examination in enhancing the clinician-patient relationship cannot be overestimated. THE GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Any examination begins with an assessment of the general appear-ance of the patient, with notation of age, posture, demeanor, and 267 SEC Tion 2 DiAgnoSiS oF CARDiovASCulAR DiSoRDERS overall health status. Is the patient in pain or resting quietly, dyspneic or diaphoretic? Does the patient choose to avoid certain body positions to reduce or eliminate pain, as might be the case with suspected acute pericarditis? Are there clues indicating that dyspnea may have a pulmonary cause, such as a barrel chest deformity with an increased anterior-posterior diameter, tachypnea, and pursed-lip breathing? Skin pallor, cyanosis, and jaundice can be appreciated readily and provide additional clues. A chronically ill-appearing emaciated patient may suggest the presence of long-standing heart failure or another systemic disorder, such as a malignancy. Various genetic syndromes, often with cardiovascular involvement, can also be recognized easily, such as trisomy 21, Marfan’s syndrome, and Holt-Oram syndrome. Height and weight should be measured routinely, and both body mass index and body surface area should be calculated. Knowledge of the waist circumference and the waist-to-hip ratio can be used to predict long-term cardiovascular risk. Mental status, level of alertness, and mood should be assessed continuously during the interview and examination. Skin Central cyanosis occurs with significant right-to-left shunting at the level of the heart or lungs, allowing deoxygenated blood to reach the systemic circulation. Peripheral cyanosis or acrocyanosis, in contrast, is usually related to reduced extremity blood flow due to small vessel constriction, as seen in patients with severe heart failure, shock, or peripheral vascular disease; it can be aggravated by the use of β-adrenergic blockers with unopposed α-mediated constriction. Differential cyanosis refers to isolated cyanosis affecting the lower but not the upper extremities in a patient with a large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and secondary pulmonary hypertension with right-to-left to shunting at the great vessel level.
The extent of the physical examination during the gynecologic visit is often dictated by the patient’s primary concerns and symptoms. For example, for healthy teens without symptoms who are requesting oral contraceptives before the initiation of intercourse, a gynecologic examination is not necessarily required. Some aspects of the examination—such as assessment of vital signs and measurement of height, weight, blood pressure, and calculation of a body mass index— should be performed routinely during most office visits. Typically, examination of the breasts and abdomen and a complete examination of the pelvis are considered to be essential parts of the gynecologic examination. It is often helpful to ask the patient if the gynecologic examination was difficult for her in the past; this may be true for women with a history of sexual abuse. For women who are undergoing their first gynecologic examination, it may be useful to ask what they have heard about the gynecologic examination or to state: “Most women are nervous before their first exam, but afterward, most describe it as ‘uncomfortable.’”

Abdominal Examination With the patient in the supine position, an attempt should be made to have her relax as much as possible. Her head should be leaned back and supported gently by a pillow so that she does not tense her abdominal muscles. Flexion of the knees may facilitate relaxation. The abdomen should be inspected for signs of an intra-abdominal mass, organomegaly, or distention that would, for example, suggest ascites or intestinal obstruction. Auscultation of bowel sounds, if deemed necessary to ascertain the nature of the bowel sounds, should precede palpation. The frequency of intestinal sounds and their quality should be noted. In a patient with intestinal obstruction, “rushes,” as well as the occasional high-pitched sound, can be heard. Bowel sounds associated with an ileus may occur less frequently but at the same pitch as normal bowel sounds. The abdomen is palpated to evaluate the size and configuration of the liver, spleen, and other abdominal contents. Evidence of fullness or mass effect should be noted.
Dynamic cardiac auscultation provides further evidence as to the significance and origin of many mur-murs (Table 21-7).96Although auscultation may provide initial evidence to the existence of valvular disease, associated signs and symptoms may help narrow the diagnosis. Abnormalities in the splitting of the heart sounds and additional heart sounds should be noted, as should the presence of pulmonary rales. Peripheral pulses should be checked for abnormal intensity or timing, and the presence of a jugular venous wave should be documented. Addi-tionally, symptoms of syncope, angina pectoris, heart failure, and peripheral thromboembolism are important and may help guide diagnosis and management.Several imaging examinations are also available to aid in the diagnosis and classification of various valvular disorders. Electrocardiograms may provide information regarding ven-tricular hypertrophy, atrial enlargement, arrhythmias, conduc-tion abnormalities, prior myocardial infarction, and evidence of active ischemia that would prompt further workup. Posteroan-terior and lateral chest X-rays are also easy to obtain and may yield information regarding cardiac chamber size, pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary and systemic venous pressure, and cardiac calcifications. The gold standard for the evaluation of valvular heart disease is transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which is helpful in the noninvasive evaluation of valve mor-phology and function, chamber size, wall thickness, ventricu-lar function, pulmonary and hepatic vein flow, and pulmonary artery pressures. Specialized examinations based on the specific findings of TTE examinations are discussed in the following sections.Regardless of the etiology, valvular heart disease can pro-duce a myriad of hemodynamic derangements. Left untreated, valvular stenosis and insufficiency can produce significant pressure and volume overload on the affected cardiac chamber, respectively, with mixed disease consequently causing mixed pathology. Although the heart can initially compensate for alter-ations in cardiac physiology, cardiac function eventually dete-riorates, leading to heart failure, decreased patient functional status, ventricular dysfunction, and eventually death. In order to optimize long-term survival, surgery or transcatheter therapeu-tics are recommended in various forms of valvular heart disease and in an increasing number of elderly and high-risk patients.Surgical OptionsAlthough valve repair is increasingly indicated, especially in patients with aortic, mitral or tricuspid insufficiency, valve replacement is appropriate in certain patient populations. Valve replacement can be accomplished with either mechanical or bio-logical prostheses, and the choice of valve depends on many patient-specific factors such as age, health status, and desire for future pregnancy. Preexisting indications or contraindications to anticoagulation therapy also influence the choice of mechanical versus tissue valve prosthesis.Current options for mechanical valve replacement include either tilting disc valves or bileaflet valves. Although mechanical valves are highly durable, they require perma-nent anticoagulation to mitigate the risk of valve thrombosis and thromboembolic sequelae.97 Due to the concordant risk of hem-orrhagic complications, patient characteristics such as debility, lifestyle, and contraindications to systemic anticoagulation therapy may preclude mechanical valve replacement. Moreover, young women who are planning future pregnancies cannot take warfarin due to its teratogenic potential.
This situation arises more often in women than in men. Potential etiologies include microvascular coronary disease (detectable on coronary reactivity testing in response to vasoactive agents such as intracoronary adenosine, acetylcholine, and nitroglycerin) and abnormal cardiac nociception. Treatment of microvascular coronary disease should focus on efforts to improve endothelial function, including nitrates, beta blockers, calcium antagonists, statins, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Abnormal cardiac nociception is more difficult to manage and may be ameliorated in some cases by imipramine. The physical examination is often normal in patients with stable angina when they are asymptomatic. However, because of the increased likelihood of IHD in patients with diabetes and/or peripheral arterial disease, clinicians should search for evidence of atherosclerotic disease at other sites, such as an abdominal aortic aneurysm, carotid arterial bruits, and diminished arterial pulses in the lower extremities. The physical examination also should include a search for evidence of risk factors for atherosclerosis such as xanthelasmas and xanthomas (Chap. 291e). Evidence for peripheral arterial disease should be sought by evaluating the pulse contour at multiple locations and comparing the blood pressure between the arms and between the arms and the legs (ankle-brachial index). Examination of the fundi may reveal an increased light reflex and arteriovenous nicking as evidence of hypertension. There also may be signs of anemia, thyroid disease, and nicotine stains on the fingertips from cigarette smoking. Palpation may reveal cardiac enlargement and abnormal contraction of the cardiac impulse (left ventricular dyskinesia). Auscultation can uncover arterial bruits, a third and/or fourth heart sound, and, if acute ischemia or previous infarction has impaired papillary muscle function, an apical systolic murmur due to mitral regurgitation. These auscultatory signs are best appreciated with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position. Aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation (Chap.
Occasionally, body habitus is helpful—e.g., in patients with Marfan syndrome or the prototypical young, tall, thin man with spontaneous pneumothorax. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Vital Signs Significant tachycardia and hypotension are indicative of important hemodynamic consequences of the underlying cause of chest discomfort and should prompt a rapid survey for the most severe conditions, such as acute MI with cardiogenic shock, massive pulmonary embolism, pericarditis with tamponade, or tension pneumothorax. Acute aortic emergencies usually present with severe hypertension but may be associated with profound hypotension when there is coronary arterial compromise or dissection into the pericardium. Sinus tachycardia is an important manifestation of submassive pulmonary embolism. Tachypnea and hypoxemia point toward a pulmonary cause. The presence of low-grade fever is nonspecific because it may occur with MI and with thromboembolism in addition to infection. Pulmonary Examination of the lungs may localize a primary pulmonary cause of chest discomfort, as in cases of pneumonia, asthma, or pneumothorax. Left ventricular dysfunction from severe ischemia/infarction as well as acute valvular complications of MI or aortic dissection can lead to pulmonary edema, which is an indicator of high risk. Cardiac The jugular venous pulse is often normal in patients with acute myocardial ischemia but may reveal characteristic patterns with pericardial tamponade or acute right ventricular dysfunction (Chaps. 267 and 288). Cardiac auscultation may reveal a third or, more commonly, a fourth heart sound, reflecting myocardial systolic or diastolic dysfunction. Murmurs of mitral regurgitation or a harsh murmur of a ventricular-septal defect may indicate mechanical complications of STEMI. A murmur of aortic insufficiency may be a complication of proximal aortic dissection. Other murmurs may reveal underlying cardiac disorders contributory to ischemia (e.g., aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Pericardial friction rubs reflect pericardial inflammation.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
The calculi are typically com-posed of calcium phosphate or oxalate. In contrast, PHPT is found to be the underlying disorder in only 3% of patients pre-senting with nephrolithiasis. Nephrocalcinosis, which refers to renal parenchymal calcification, is found in <5% of patients and is more likely to lead to renal dysfunction. Chronic hypercalce-mia also can impair concentrating ability, thereby resulting in polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. The incidence of hyperten-sion is variable but has been reported to occur in up to 50% of patients with PHPT. Hypertension appears to be more common in older patients and correlates with the magnitude of renal dys-function and, in contrast to other symptoms, is least likely to improve after parathyroidectomy.Bone Disease. Bone disease, including osteopenia, osteoporo-sis, and osteitis fibrosa cystica, is found in about 15% of patients with PHPT. Increased bone turnover, as found in patients with osteitis fibrosa cystica, can be determined by documenting an elevated blood alkaline phosphatase level. Advanced PHPT with osteitis fibrosa cystica now occurs in <5% of patients. It has pathognomonic radiologic findings, which are best seen on X-rays of the hands and are characterized by subperiosteal resorption (most apparent on the radial aspect of the middle pha-lanx of the second and third fingers), bone cysts, and tufting of the distal phalanges (Fig. 38-29). The skull also may be affected and appears mottled with a loss of definition of the inner and outer cortices. Brown or osteoclastic tumors and bone cysts also may be present. Severe bone disease, resulting in bone pain and tenderness and/or pathologic fractures, is rarely observed nowa-days. However, reductions of bone mineral density (BMD) with osteopenia and osteoporosis are more common.
(Reproduced, with permission, from Skinner HB. Current Diagnosis & Treatment in Orthopedics, 2nd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 2000: 272.) Presents with crepitus, ↓ ROM, and initially pain that worsens with activity and weight bearing but improves with rest. Morning stiffness lasts for < 30 minutes. Stiffness is also experienced after periods of rest (“gelling”). Radiographs show joint space narrowing, osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, and subchondral bone cysts (see Figure 2.9-4). Radiograph severity does not correlate with symptomatology. Synovial ﬂuid shows straw-colored ﬂuid, normal viscosity, and a WBC count < 2000 cells/μL. Physical therapy, weight reduction, and NSAIDs. Intra-articular corticosteroid injections may provide temporary relief. Consider joint replacement (e.g., total hip/knee arthroplasty) in advanced cases. FIGURE 2.9-4. Osteoarthritis. Plain radiographs show joint space narrowing, osteophytes, and subchondral degenerative cysts involving the DIP and PIP joints, with sparing of the MCP.
Muscle biopsy specimens containmuscle fibers of varying size without inflammation. Hemochromatosis is a disorder of iron storage. Absorption of excessive amounts of iron from the intestine leads to iron deposition in parenchymal cells, which results in impairment of organ function (Chap. 428). Symptoms of hemochromatosis usually begin between the ages of 40 and 60 but can appear earlier. Arthropathy, which occurs in 20–40% of patients, usually begins after the age of 50 and may be the first clinical feature of hemochromatosis. The arthropathy is an osteoarthritis-like disorder affecting the small joints of the hands and later the larger joints, such as knees, ankles, shoulders, and hips. The second and third metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands are often the first and most prominent joints affected; this clinical picture may provide an important clue to the possibility of hemochromatosis becausethese jointsarenotpredominantlyaffectedby “routine”osteoarthritis.Patients experience some morningstiffness andpainwith use of involved joints. The affected joints are enlarged and mildly tender. Radiographs show narrowing of the joint space, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cysts, and juxtaarticular proliferation of bone. Hooklike osteophytes are seen in up to 20% of patients; although they are regarded as a characteristic feature of hemochromatosis, they can also occur in osteoarthritis and are not disease specific. The synovial fluid is noninflammatory. The synovium shows mild to moderate proliferation of iron-containing lining cells, fibrosis, and some mononuclear cell infiltration. In approximately half of patients, there is evidence of calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease, and some patients late in the course of disease experience episodes of acute pseudogout (Chap. 395).
Typical symptoms are new-onset pain and signs of sepsis. Chronic infections are usually caused by low-virulence microorganisms or occur after ineffective treatment of early-onset infection. FIGURE 158-2 A 42-year-old man who had had a malleolar frac-ture 6 weeks previously had persistent pain and slight inflam-mation after orthopedic repair. His infection was treated with oral antibiotics without debridement surgery. This insufficient manage-ment of an implant-associated Staphylococcus aureus infection was complicated by a sinus tract. Patients may present with persisting pain, subtle local signs of inflammation, intermittent discharge of pus, or fluctuating erythema over the scar (Fig. 158-2). The diagnostic workup for acute hematogenous long-bone osteomyelitis is similar to that for vertebral osteomyelitis. Bone remodeling and thus marker uptake are increased for at least 1 year after surgery. Therefore, the three-phase bone scan is not useful during this interval. However, in late recurrences it allows rapid diagnosis at low cost. If the results are positive, CT is required in order to estimate the extent of inflamed tissue and to detect bone necrosis (sequesters). Implant-associated infection should be suspected if CRP values do not return to the normal range or rise after an initial decrease. Clinical and laboratory suspicion should prompt surgical exploration and sampling. In chronic osteomyelitis of >1 year’s duration, single-photon emission CT plus conventional CT (SPECT/CT) is a good option, either with 99mTc methylene diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP)–labeled leukocytes or with labeled monoclonal antibodies to granulocytes.
The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap. 24). Petechial rashes are typically seen with meningococcemia or Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF; see Fig. 25e-16); erythroderma is associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS) and drug fever. The soft tissue and muscle examination is critical. Areas of erythema or duskiness, edema, and tenderness may indicate underlying necrotizing fasciitis, myositis, or myonecrosis. The neurologic examination must include a careful assessment of mental status for signs of early encephalopathy. Evidence of nuchal rigidity or focal neurologic findings should be sought. DIAGNOSTIC WORKUP After a quick clinical assessment, diagnostic material should be obtained rapidly and antibiotic and supportive treatment begun. Blood (for cultures; baseline complete blood count with differential; measurement of serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and serum glucose; and liver function tests) can be obtained at the time an IV line is placed and before antibiotics are administered. The blood lactate concentration also should be measured. Three sets of blood cultures should be performed for patients with possible acute endocarditis. Asplenic patients should have a buffy coat examined for bacteria; these patients can have >106 organisms per milliliter of blood (compared with 104/mL in patients with an intact spleen). Blood smears from patients at risk for severe parasitic disease, such as malaria or babesiosis (Chap.
HISTORY Presenting symptoms are frequently nonspecific. Detailed questions should be asked about the onset and duration of symptoms and about changes in severity or rate of progression over time. Host factors and comorbid conditions may increase the risk of infection with certain organisms or of a more fulminant course than is usually seen. Lack of splenic function, alcoholism with significant liver disease, IV drug use, HIV infection, diabetes, malignancy, organ transplantation, and chemotherapy all predispose to specific infections and frequently to increased severity. The patient should be questioned about factors that might help identify a nidus for invasive infection, such as recent upper respiratory tract infections, influenza, or varicella; prior trauma; disruption of cutaneous barriers due to lacerations, burns, surgery, body piercing, or decubiti; and the presence of foreign bodies, such as nasal packing after rhinoplasty, tampons, or prosthetic joints. Travel, contact with pets or other animals, or activities that might result in tick or mosquito exposure can lead to diagnoses that would not otherwise be considered. Recent dietary intake, medication use, social or occupational contact with ill individuals, vaccination history, recent sexual contacts, and menstrual history may be relevant. A review of systems should focus on any neurologic signs or sensorium alterations, rashes or skin lesions, and focal pain or tenderness and should also include a general review of respiratory, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary symptoms. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION A complete physical examination should be performed, with special attention to several areas that are sometimes given short shrift in routine examinations. Assessment of the patient’s general appearance and vital signs, skin and soft tissue examination, and the neurologic evaluation are of particular importance. The patient may appear either anxious and agitated or lethargic and apathetic. Fever is usually present, although elderly patients and compromised hosts (e.g., patients who are uremic or cirrhotic and those who are taking glucocorticoids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) may be afebrile despite serious underlying infection. Measurement of blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate helps determine the degree of hemodynamic and metabolic compromise. The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap.
However, the distinctive appearance of an eruption in concert with a clinical syndrome can facilitate a prompt diagnosis and the institution of life-saving therapy or critical infection-control interventions. Representative images of many of the rashes discussed in this chapter are included in Chap. 25e. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

A thorough history of patients with fever and rash includes the following relevant information: immune status, medications taken within the previous month, specific travel history, immunization status, exposure to domestic pets and other animals, history of animal (including arthropod) bites, recent dietary exposures, existence of cardiac abnormalities, presence of prosthetic material, recent exposure to ill individuals, and exposure to sexually transmitted diseases. The history should also include the site of onset of the rash and its direction and rate of spread. A thorough physical examination entails close attention to the rash, with an assessment and precise definition of its salient features. First, it is critical to determine what type of lesions make up the eruption. Macules are flat lesions defined by an area of changed color (i.e., a blanchable erythema). Papules are raised, solid lesions <5 mm in diameter; plaques are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a flat, plateau-like surface; and nodules are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a more rounded configuration. Wheals (urticaria, hives) are papules or plaques that are pale pink and may appear annular (ringlike) as they enlarge; classic (nonvasculitic) wheals are transient, lasting only 24 h in any defined area. Vesicles (<5 mm) and bullae (>5 mm) are circumscribed, elevated lesions containing fluid. Pustules are raised lesions containing purulent exudate; vesicular processes such as varicella or herpes simplex may evolve to pustules. Nonpalpable purpura is a flat lesion that is due to bleeding into the skin. If <3 mm in diameter, the purpuric lesions are termed petechiae; if >3 mm, they are termed ecchymoses. Palpable purpura is a raised lesion that is due to inflammation of the vessel wall (vasculitis) with subsequent hemorrhage.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Medications frequently implicated include penicillin, sulfonamides, minocycline, cefaclor, hydantoins, and thiazides. Available @ StudentConsult.com

The symptoms of serum sickness typically occur 7 to 21 daysafter the administration of drugs, foreign proteins, or infections.Symptom onset may be more rapid (within 1 to 4 days) in previously sensitized individuals. The classic clinical manifestationsconsist of fever, polyarticular arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, andcutaneous symptoms. Cutaneous lesions vary and may includeurticaria, angioedema, erythema multiforme, morbilliformrash, and a palpable purpura or serpiginous rash at the interfaceof the dorsal and palmar or plantar aspects of the hands and feet. Carditis, glomerulonephritis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, encephalomyelitis, and peripheral neuritis are rare complications. Laboratory tests may show an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, presence of circulating immune complexes, and depressed complement (C3 and C4) levels. Skin biopsy specimens show immune deposits of IgM, IgA, IgE, or C3. Hematuria or proteinuria or both may be present. The diagnosis is established by history of exposure to an inciting cause, characteristic clinical manifestations, and laboratory testing showing circulating immune complexes and depressed complement levels. Serum sickness is self-limited and resolves within 1 to 2 weeks; therefore, treatment is symptomatic relief. Antihistamines may be administered to relieve pruritus. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are given for fever and joint pain, and, if necessary, prednisone (1 to 2 mg/kg orally daily) is administered with a tapering dose. Allergy skin testing does not predict the likelihood of serum sickness development. The primary means of prevention is to avoid exposure to the implicated cause. Systemic allergic reactions usually result from stinging insectsof the order Hymenoptera, which include apids (honeybee and bumblebee), vespids (yellow jacket, wasp, yellow-face, and white-face hornets), and formicids (fire and harvester ants).Honeybees have a barbed stinger that remains embedded aftera sting.
In the past, cor-rection of the hernia was believed to be a surgical emergency, and patients underwent surgery shortly after birth. It is now accepted that the presence of persistent pulmonary hyperten-sion that results in right-to-left shunting across the open fora-men ovale or the ductus arteriosus, and the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia, are the leading causes of cardiorespiratory insuffi-ciency. Current management therefore is directed toward man-aging the pulmonary hypertension, and minimizing barotrauma while optimizing oxygen delivery. To achieve this goal, infants are placed on mechanical ventilation using relatively low or “gentle” settings that prevent overinflation of the noninvolved lung. Levels of PaCO2 in the range of 50 to 60 mmHg or higher are accepted as long as the pH remains ≥7.25. If these objec-tives cannot be achieved using conventional ventilation, high frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) may be employed to avoid the injurious effects of conventional tidal volume venti-lation. Echocardiography will assess the degree of pulmonary hypertension and identify the presence of any coexisting cardiac anomaly. ICU goals include minimal sedation, meticulous atten-tion to endotracheal tube secretions, and gradual changes to ven-tilator settings to avoid inducing pulmonary hypertension via hypoxia. To minimize the degree of pulmonary hypertension, inhaled nitric oxide may be administered, and in some patients, this improves pulmonary perfusion. Nitric oxide is administered into the ventilation circuit and is used in concentrations up to 40 parts per million. Correction of acidosis using bicarbonate solution may minimize the degree of pulmonary hypertension. As the degree of pulmonary hypertension becomes hemody-namically significant, right-sided heart failure develops, and systemic perfusion is impaired. Administration of excess IV fluid will compound the degree of cardiac failure and lead to marked peripheral edema. Inotropic support using epinephrine, dopamine, and milrinone alone or in combination may be useful in optimizing cardiac contractility and maintaining mean arterial pressure.Infants with CDH who remain severely hypoxic despite maximal ventilatory care may be candidates for treatment of their respiratory failure ECMO, with access via venovenous (VV) or venoarterial (VA) routes. VV bypass is established with a single cannula through the right internal jugular vein, with blood removed from and infused into the right atrium by separate ports.
N Englt) Med 356:39, 2007

Zeeman GG: Obstetric critical care: a blueprint for improved outcomes. Crit Care Med 34:S208, 2006

Zwiers WJ, Blodgett TM, Vallejo MC, et al: Successful vaginal delivery for a parturient with complete aortic coarctation.) Clin Anesth 18:300,t2006

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ..................... 975 DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION IN PREGNANCY ...... 977

ADVERSE PREGNANCY EFFECTS ...................978

ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS ....i....i....i....i.......... 980

ANTIHYPERTENSIVE TREATMENT IN PREGNANCY ... 981

SUPERIMPOSED PREECLAMPSIA .................. 983

FETAL ASSESSMENT ....i.........i............... 983

DELIVERY . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Assisted ventilation by facemask at a rate of 40 to 60 breaths per minute is recommended. Oxygen saturation is monitored by pulse oximetry. Supplemental oxygen can be given in graduated, rising percentages to maintain oxygen saturation values within a normal range per minute of life. Adequate ventilation is best indicated by an improved heart rate. Colorimetric end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETC02) monitoring placed between the positive-pressure device and facemask serves as a helpful adjunct for detection of successful gas exchange during mask ventilation (Weiner, 2016). If the heart rate remains � 100 bpm after 5 to 10 positive pressure breaths, the attempted ventilation is inadequate and corrective steps must be taken. These can be remembered by the pneumonic MR. SOPA (Table 32-1). The two most common problems are mask leak due to an inefective seal and malposition of the airway (Schmolzer, 2011). If corrective steps do not improve the heart rate, either intubation with an endotracheal tube or placement of a laryngeal mask airway is required. If mask ventilation is inefective or prolonged, an alternative airway is placed. For tracheal intubation, a laryngoscope with a straight blade-size 0 for a preterm newborn and size 1 for a term neonate-is used. Gentle cricoid pressure may be useful. An increasing heart rate and ETC02 detection after several breaths are the primary methods of conirming intubation of the trachea and not the esophagus. One can also look for symmetrical chest wall motion; auscultate for equal breath sounds, especially in the axillae; and auscultate for the absence of breath sounds or gurgling over the stomach. The Newborn 609

Once in place, the tube is used for tracheal suctioning only for a suspected obstructed airway.
Tachycardia may impair coronary blood flow,which decreases myocardial oxygen delivery. Increased central blood volume caused by sodium and water retention andby incomplete emptying of the ventricles during systole resultsin elevated left ventricular volume and pressure, which impairsubendocardial blood flow. As compensatory mechanisms areovercome, the failing left ventricle produces increased ventricularend-diastolic volume and pressure, which leads to increased leftatrial pressure, resulting in pulmonary edema. This sequence alsocontributes to right ventricular failure because of increased pulmonary artery pressure and increased right ventricular afterload. Primary cardiogenic shock may occur in children who have congenital heart disease. Cardiogenic shock also may occur in previously healthy children secondary to viral myocarditis, dysrhythmias, or toxic or metabolic abnormalities or after hypoxic-ischemic injury (see Chapters 142, 145, and 147, as well as Table 40-1). Obstructive shock results from mechanical obstruction of ventricular outflow. Causes include congenital lesions such as coarctation of the aorta, interrupted aortic arch, and severe aortic valvular stenosis, along with acquired diseases (e.g., hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) (see Table 40-1). For neonates presenting in shock, obstructive lesions must be considered. Dissociative shock refers to conditions in which tissue perfusion is normal, but cells are unable to use oxygen because the hemoglobin has an abnormal affinity for oxygen, preventing its release to the tissues (see Table 40-1). All forms of shock produce evidence that tissue perfusion and oxygenation are insufficient (increased heart rate, abnormal blood pressure, alterations of peripheral pulses). The etiology of shock may alter the initial presentation of these signs and symptoms. Hypovolemic shock is distinguished from other causes of shock by history and the absence of signs of heart failure or sepsis. In addition to the signs of sympathoadrenal activity (tachycardia, vasoconstriction), clinical manifestations include signs of dehydration (dry mucous membranes, decreased urine output) or blood loss (pallor). Recovery depends on the degree of hypovolemia, the patient’s preexisting status, and rapid diagnosis and treatment.
689, March 2017c

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics: Neonatal encephalopathy and neurologic outcome. Washington, ACOG,o2014

Ananth CV, Chauhan SP, Chen HY, et al: Electronic fetal monitoring in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 121(5):927,o2013

Anderson BL, Scerbo MW, Belfore A, et al: Time and number of displays impact critical signal detection in fetal heart rate tracings. Am J Perinatol 28(6):435,o2011

Angel J, Knuppel R, Lake M: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate patterns associated with intravenous butorphanol administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 149:465, 1984 Anyaegbunam M, Ditchik A, Stoessel R, et al: Vibroacoustic stimulation of the fetus entering the second stage oflabor. Obstet Gynecol 83:963, 1994 Api 0, Carvalho JS: Fetal dysrhythmias. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 22(1):31, 2008

Arikan GM, Scholz HS, Petru E, et al: Cord blood oxygen saturation in vigorous infants at birth: what is normal? BJOG 107:987,o2000

Ayres-de-Campos 0, Bernardes J, Costa-Pereira A, et al: Inconsistencies in classiication by experts of cardiotocograms and subsequent clinical decision. BJOG 106:1307, 1999

Bakker JJ, Verhoeven CJ, Janssen PF, et al: Outcomes after internal versus external tocodynamometry for monitoring labor. N Engl J Med 362:306, 2010 Bakker PC, Kurver PH, Duik OJ, et al: Elevated uterine activity increases the risk offetal acidosis at birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:313,o2007

Ball RH, Parer JT: he physiologic mechanisms of variable decelerations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:1683, 1992

Bannerman CG, Grobman WA, Antoniewicz L: Assessment of the concordance among 2-tier, 3-tier, and 5-tier fetal heart rate classiication systems. Am J Obstet GynecoI205(3):288.e1, 2011

Banta HD, Thacker SB: Electronic fetal monitoring: lessons from a formative case of health technology assessment. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 18:762,o2002

Becker JH, Bax L, Amer-Wahlin I, et al: ST analysis of the fetal electrocardiogram in intrapartum fetal monitoring. Obstet Gynecol 119:145,2012 Belfort A, Saade GR, hom E, et al: A randomized trial of intrapartum fetal

ECG ST-segment analysis.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs. MAOIs. Patient on dopamine antagonist. Conversion disorder. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Anorexia. A 35-year-old man has recurrent episodes of palpitations, diaphoresis, and fear of going crazy. The most serious side effect of clozapine. A 21-year-old man has three months of social withdrawal, worsening grades, ﬂattened affect, and concrete thinking. Key side effects of atypical antipsychotics. A young weight lifter receives IV haloperidol and complains that his eyes are deviated sideways. Diagnosis? Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;29:947. Zesiewicz TA et al: Update on treatment of essential tremor. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2013;15:410. The history is suggestive of parkinsonism, but the incon-spicuous tremor and early cognitive changes raise the possi-bility of atypical parkinsonism rather than classic Parkinson’s disease. The prognosis of these disorders is worse than that of classic Parkinson’s disease. Given the cognitive changes and his age, the use of a dopamine agonist was unwise, as these agents are more likely than levodopa to exacerbate or precipitate behavioral and cognitive disturbances. Sleep attacks may occur spontaneously but are especially noted in patients receiving dopamine agonists. The patient has also developed punding, which is a recognized adverse effect of dopaminergic medication. Surgical treatment (deep brain stimulation) is contraindicated in patients with cognitive changes or atypical parkinsonism. Charles DeBattista, MD * severe akathisia. Although more costly, lurasidone is then prescribed, which, over the course of several weeks of treatment, improves his symptoms and is tolerated by the patient. What signs and symptoms would support an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia? In the treatment of schizophre-nia, what benefits do the second-generation antipsychotic drugs offer over the traditional agents such as haloperidol? In addition to the management of schizophrenia, what other clinical indications warrant consideration of the use of drugs nominally classified as antipsychotics? A 19-year-old male student is brought into the clinic by his mother who has been concerned about her son’s erratic behavior and strange beliefs.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Continue the bimanual palpation, and evaluate the cervix for position, architecture, consistency, and tenderness, especially on mobility of the cervix. Rebound tenderness should be noted at this time. The intravaginal fingers should then explore the anterior, posterior, and lateral fornices. 4. Place the “vaginal” finger(s) in the right lateral fornix and the “abdominal” hand on the right lower quadrant. Manipulate the abdominal hand gently downward toward the vaginal fingers to outline the adnexa. A normal tube is not palpable. A normal ovary (about 4 × 2 × 3 cm in size, sensitive, firm, and freely movable) is often not palpable. If an adnexal mass is found, evaluate its location relative to the uterus and cervix, architecture, consistency, tenderness, and mobility. 5. Palpate the left adnexal region, repeating the technique described previously, but place the vaginal fingers in the left fornix and the abdominal hand on the left lower quadrant. 6. Follow the bimanual examination with a rectovaginal–abdominal examination. Insert the index finger into the vagina and the middle finger into the rectum very gently. Place the other hand on the infraumbilical region.
In women, a number of organs can develop large masses, including the ovaries (solid and cystic tumors), the embryological remnants within the broad ligaments, and the uterus (pregnancy and fibroids). The physician asked further questions. It is always important to establish whether the patient is pregnant (occasionally, pregnancy may come as a surprise to the patient). This patient’s pregnancy test was negative. After the patient emptied her bladder, there was no change in the mass. The physician thought the mass might be a common benign tumor of the uterus (fibroid). To establish the diagnosis, he obtained an ultrasound scan of the pelvis, which confirmed that the mass stemmed from the uterus. The patient was referred to a gynecologist, and after a long discussion regarding her symptomatology, fertility, and risks, the surgeon and the patient agreed that a hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus) would be an appropriate course of therapy. The patient sought a series of opinions from other gynecologists, all of whom agreed that surgery was the appropriate option. The fibroid was removed with no complications. A 52-year-old woman was referred to a gynecologist. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated the presence of uterine fibroids. After a long discussion regarding her symptomatology, fertility, and risks, she was offered the choice between a hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus) or uterine artery embolization. A uterine artery embolization is a procedure where an interventional radiologist uses a catheter to inject small particles into the uterine arteries. This reduces the blood supply to the fibroids and causes them to shrink.
Mild, nonspecifc GI symptoms or pelvic pressure/pain may be seen. Early disease is typically not detected on routine pelvic exam. Some 75% of woman present with advanced malignant disease, as evidenced by abdominal pain and bloating, a palpable abdominal mass, and ascites. Table 2.12-10 differentiates the benign and malignant characteristics of pelvic masses. Tumor markers (see Table 2.12-11): ↑ CA-125 is associated with epithelial cell cancer (90% of ovarian cancers) but is used only as a marker for progression and recurrence. Premenopausal women: ↑ CA-125 may point to benign disease such as endometriosis. Postmenopausal women: ↑ CA-125 (> 35 units) indicates an ↑ likelihood that the ovarian tumor is malignant. Transvaginal ultrasound: Used to screen high-risk women. T AB LE 2.1 2-1 0. Benign vs. Malignant Pelvic Masses

Treatment of ovarian masses is as follows:

Premenarchal women: Masses > 2 cm require exploratory laparotomy. Premenopausal women:

Observation for 4–6 weeks is suffcient for asymptomatic, mobile, unilateral, simple cystic masses < 8–10 cm. Most resolve spontaneously. Surgical evaluation is warranted for masses > 8–10 cm as well as for those that are unchanged on repeat pelvic exam and ultrasound. Postmenopausal women:

Asymptomatic, unilateral simple cysts < 5 cm in diameter with a normal CA-125 should be closely followed with ultrasound. Palpable masses warrant surgical evaluation by exploratory laparotomy.
Differential Diagnosis Ovarian Masses During the postmenopausal years, the ovaries become smaller. Ovarian volume is related to age, menopausal status, weight, height, and use of exogenous hormones (260). A large body habitus and uterine size make it more difficult to palpate and assess ovarian size, particularly among postmenopausal women, and transvaginal ultrasonography is significantly more accurate than clinical examination. Transvaginal ultrasonography is suggested in addition to annual pelvic examination among overweight postmenopausal women (261). Although ovarian cancer is notoriously difficult to diagnose at any early stage, the concept that it is frequently asymptomatic is challenged. Symptoms may include back pain, fatigue, bloating, constipation, abdominal pain, and urinary symptoms; these symptoms are of greater severity and more recent onset in women with ovarian malignancy (262). Thus it is argued that among primary clinicians, the possibility of an ovarian mass (either benign or malignant) in women with these symptoms warrants further diagnostic investigation. However, the positive predictive value of these symptoms is not high for the prediction of early-stage disease, and the use of symptoms to trigger an evaluation for ovarian cancer is noted to result in diagnosis of the disease in only 1 in 100 women in the general population with such symptoms (263). Ovarian cancer is predominantly a disease of postmenopausal women; the incidence increases with age, and the average patient age is about 56 to 60 years (see Chapter 37). With increased use of pelvic ultrasonographic evaluation, a new problem arose in post-menopausal women: the discovery of a small ovarian cyst. This is particularly troublesome in

CHAPTER 14 Benign Diseases of the Female Reproductive Tract

Perform D&C to rule out endometrial carcinoma in symptomatic patients Desire to retain uterus Persistent atypical hyperplasia Normal or atrophic endometrium  Continue Provera 5 mg/day 10 days/month for 12 months  Consider annual endometrial biopsy  Ovulation induction if childbearing desired Provera 10–20 mg/day for 11 to 14 days per month Repeat endometrial biopsy in 3 to 6 months Trial of high dose progestins (e.g., Provera 40–100 mg/day for 3 months) No desire to retain uterus Hysterectomy

Figure 14.34 Management of endometrial hyperplasia. (Reproduced with permission from Berek & Hacker’s Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010, p 410.) a woman who is entirely asymptomatic and whose ultrasonographic examination was performed for indications unrelated to pelvic pathology. It is suggested that when the cyst is asymptomatic, small (<5–10 cm in diameter), unilocular, and thin walled, with a normal CA125 level, the risk of malignancy is extremely low and these masses can be followed conservatively, without surgery (220,264,265). Surgery may be indicated in some women with a strong family history of ovarian, breast, endometrial, or colon cancer, or with a mass that appears to be enlarging (see Chapter 37).
Uterine, gastric, breast, and colorectal malignancies can metastasize to the ovaries and should be considered, although as with many malignancies, these tumors are more common in postmenopausal-aged women. Masses that include the fallopian tube are related primarily to inﬂammatory causes in the reproductive age group. A tubo-ovarian abscess can be present in association with PID (see Chapter 18). In addition, a complex inﬂammatory mass consisting of bowel, tube, and ovary may be present without a large abscess cavity. Ectopic pregnancies can occur in the reproductive age group and must be excluded when a patient presents with pain, a positive pregnancy test, and an adnexal mass (see Chapter 20). Paraovarian cysts may be noted either on examination or on imaging studies. In many instances, a normal ipsilateral ovary can be visualized using ultrasonography. The frequency of malignancy in paraovarian tumors is quite low and may be more common in paraovarian masses larger than 5 cm (218). Diagnosis A complete pelvic examination, including rectovaginal examination and Papanicolaou (Pap) test, should be performed. Estimations of the size of a mass should be presented in centimeters rather than in comparison to common objects or fruit (e.g., orange, grapefruit, tennis ball, golf ball). After pregnancy is excluded, one simple office technique that can help determine whether a mass is uterine or adnexal includes sounding and measuring the depth of the uterine cavity. Pelvic imaging can confirm the characteristics of the adnexal mass—whether solid or cystic or mixed echogenicity. Diagnosis of uterine leiomyomas usually is based on the characteristic finding of an irregularly enlarged uterus. The size and location of the usually multiple leiomyomas can be confirmed and documented with pelvic ultrasonography (Fig. 14.23).
Pregnancy is the most prevalent endocrinologic cause, and nausea affects 70% of women in the first trimester. Hyperemesis gravidarum is a severe form of nausea of pregnancy that produces significant fluid loss and electrolyte disturbances. Uremia, ketoacidosis, adrenal insufficiency, and parathyroid and thyroid disease are other metabolic etiologies. Circulating toxins evoke emesis via effects on the area postrema. Endogenous toxins are generated in fulminant liver failure, whereas exogenous enterotoxins may be produced by enteric bacterial infection. Ethanol intoxication is a common toxic etiology of nausea and vomiting. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The history helps define the etiology of nausea and vomiting. Drugs, toxins, and infections often cause acute symptoms, whereas established illnesses evoke chronic complaints. Gastroparesis and pyloric obstruction elicit vomiting within an hour of eating. Emesis from intestinal blockage occurs later. Vomiting occurring within minutes of meal consumption prompts consideration of rumination syndrome. With severe gastric emptying delays, the vomitus may contain food residue ingested hours or days before. Hematemesis raises suspicion of an ulcer, malignancy, or Mallory-Weiss tear. Feculent emesis is noted with distal intestinal or colonic obstruction. Bilious vomiting excludes gastric obstruction, whereas emesis of undigested food is consistent with a Zenker’s diverticulum or achalasia.
Not contraindications to vaccination. Tests to rule out shaken baby syndrome. A neonate has meconium ileus. Bilious emesis within hours after the first feeding. A two-month-old baby presents with nonbilious projectile emesis. What are the appropriate steps in management? The most common 1° immunodeficiency. An infant has a high fever and onset of rash as fever breaks. What is he at risk for? What is the immunodeficiency? A boy has chronic respiratory infections. Nitroblue tetrazolium test is . A child has eczema, thrombocytopenia, and high levels of IgA. A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease.
Regurgitation, on the other hand, is effortless and not preceded by nausea. In neonates with true vomiting, congenital obstructive lesions should be considered. Allergic reactions to formula in the first 2 months of life may present with vomiting. Infantile GER (“spitting up”) occurs in most infants and can be large in volume, but is effortless and these infants do not appear ill. Pyloric stenosis occurs in the first months of life and is characterized by steadily worsening, forceful vomiting that occurs immediately after feedings. A visibly distended stomach, often with visible peristaltic waves, is often seen before vomiting. Pyloric stenosis is more common in male infants; the family history may be positive. Other obstructive lesions, such as intestinal duplication cysts, atresias, webs, and midgut

Determine degree of functional impairment (e.g., missing school) CBC ESR Amylase, lipase

Urinalysis Abdominal ultrasound—examine liver, bile ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, kidneys, ureters (move to follow up)

Trial of 3-day lactose-free diet CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with oral, rectal, and intravenous contrast

Barium upper GI series with small bowel follow-through

Endoscopy of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum

CBC, Complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GI, gastrointestinal. *Consider using one or more of these to investigate warning signs, abnormal laboratory tests, or specific or persistent symptoms. malrotation, should be considered. Metabolic disorders (e.g.,organic acidemias, galactosemia, urea cycle defects, adrenogenital syndromes) may present with vomiting in infants. Inolder children with acute vomiting, viruses and food poisoning are common. Other infections, especially streptococcalpharyngitis, urinary tract infections, and otitis media, commonly result in vomiting. When vomiting is chronic, centralnervous system (CNS) causes (increased intracranial pressure,migraine) must be considered. Cyclic vomiting syndrome or migraine may be the etiology of recurrent vomiting. Whenabdominal pain or bilious emesis accompanies vomiting, evaluation for bowel obstruction, peptic disorders, and appendicitismust be immediately initiated.
Q3. IR is subsequently shown to have a form of PRPP synthetase that shows increased enzymic activity. Why does this result in hyperuricemia? Case 8: No Bowel Movement

Patient Presentation: DW is a 48-hour-old female who has not yet had a bowel movement. Focused History: DW is the full-term product of a normal pregnancy and delivery. She appeared normal at birth. DW is the first child of parents of Northern European ethnicity. The parents are both in good health, and their family histories are unremarkable. Pertinent Findings: DW has a distended abdomen. She recently vomited small amounts of bilious (green-colored) material. Diagnosis: Meconium ileus (obstruction of the ileum by meconium, the first stool produced by newborns) was confirmed by abdominal x-rays. About 98% of full-term newborns with meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis (CF). Diagnosis of CF was subsequently confirmed with a chloride sweat test. Treatment: The ileus was successfully treated nonsurgically. For management of the CF, the family was referred to the CF center at the regional children’s hospital.
A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease. Treatment for mild and severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Sudden onset of mental status changes, emesis, and liver dysfunction after taking aspirin. A child has loss of red light reﬂex. Diagnosis? Neuroblastoma. Esophageal atresia with distal TEF (85%). Unable to pass NG tube. Mild illness and/or low-grade fever, current antibiotic therapy, and prematurity. Ophthalmologic exam, CT, and MRI. CF or Hirschsprung’s disease. Duodenal atresia. Correct metabolic abnormalities. Then correct pyloric stenosis with pyloromyotomy.
However, a small-bowel series remains useful in the search for anatomic abnormalities, such as strictures and fistulas (as in Crohn’s disease) or blind loop syndrome (e.g., multiple jejunal diverticula) and to define the extent of a previous surgical resection. Other imaging studies that assess the integrity of small-intestinal morphology are CT enterography and magnetic resonance enterography. Capsule endoscopy and double-balloon enteroscopy are other useful aids in the diagnostic assessment of small-intestinal pathology. A small-intestinal mucosal biopsy is essential in the evaluation of a patient with documented steatorrhea or chronic diarrhea (i.e., that lasting >3 weeks) (Chap. 55). The ready availability of endoscopic equipment to examine the stomach and duodenum has led to its almost uniform use as the preferred method of obtaining

Disorders of Absorption

FIGURE 349-3 Barium contrast small-intestinal radiologic examinations. A. Normal individual. B. Celiac sprue. C. Jejunal diverticulosis. D. Crohn’s disease. (Courtesy of Morton Burrell, MD, Yale University; with permission.) histologic material from the proximal small-intestinal mucosa. The primary indications for a small-intestinal biopsy are evaluation of a patient (1) either with documented or suspected steatorrhea or with chronic diarrhea, and (2) with diffuse or focal abnormalities of the small intestine defined on a small-intestinal series. Lesions seen on small-bowel biopsy can be classified into three categories (Table 349-6): 1.
Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory.
(Repro duced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 1804.) For partial obstruction, supportive care may be sufficient and should include NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and Foley catheterization to monitor ﬂ uid status. Surgery is required in cases of complete SBO, vascular compromise (necrotic bowel), or symptoms lasting > 3 days without resolution. Exploratory laparotomy may be performed with lysis of adhesions, resection of necrotic bowel, and evaluation for stricture, IBD, and hernias. There is a 2% mortality risk for a nonstrangulated SBO; strangulated SBO is associated with up to a 25% mortality rate depending on the time between diagnosis and treatment. A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern. Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction. Risk factors include recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobility, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, DM, and medications that slow GI motility (e.g., anticholinergics, opioids). Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements. Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds. A rectal exam is required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly patients. Diffusely distended loops of small and large bowel are seen on supine AXR with air-ﬂuid levels on upright view. A Gastrografin study can rule out partial obstruction; CT can rule out neo-In diagnosing ileus, look for plasms.
Parenteral nutrition should be considered if the patient is malnourished. Most intra-abdominal abscesses can be drained percutaneously with the use of CT scan guidance. Although the majority of these patients will ultimately require surgery to remove the dis-eased segment of bowel, these interventions allow the patient’s condition to stabilize, nutrition to be optimized, and inflamma-tion to decrease prior to embarking on a surgical resection. Once an operation is undertaken, fistulae generally require resection of the segment of bowel with active Crohn’s disease; the sec-ondary sites of the fistula are often otherwise normal and do not generally require resection after division of the fistula. Simple closure of the secondary fistula site usually suffices.Chronic fibrosis may result in strictures in any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Because the fibrotic process is gradual, free perforation proximal to the obstructing stricture is rare. Chronic strictures almost never improve with medical therapy. Strictures may be treated with resection or stricturoplasty. Distal ileal strictures are sometimes amenable to colonoscopic balloon dilatation. Optimal timing for surgery should take into account the patient’s underlying medical and nutritional status.Once an operation is undertaken for Crohn’s disease, sev-eral principles should guide intraoperative decision making. In general, a laparotomy for Crohn’s disease should be performed through a midline incision because of the possible need for a stoma. Laparoscopy is also increasingly used in this setting. Because many patients with Crohn’s disease often will require multiple operations, the length of bowel removed should be Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128323/02/19   2:29 PM 1284SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIminimized. Bowel should be resected to an area with grossly nor-mal margins; frozen sections are not necessary. Finally, a primary anastomosis may be created safely if the patient is medically stable, nutritionally replete, and taking few immunosuppressive medications.
Bowel should be resected to an area with grossly nor-mal margins; frozen sections are not necessary. Finally, a primary anastomosis may be created safely if the patient is medically stable, nutritionally replete, and taking few immunosuppressive medications. Creation of a stoma should be strongly considered in any patient who is hemodynamically unstable, septic, malnour-ished, or receiving high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and among patients with extensive intra-abdominal contamination.Ileocolic and Small Bowel Crohn’s Disease. The terminal ileum and cecum are involved in Crohn’s disease in up to 41% of patients; the small intestine is involved in up to 35% of patients. The most common indications for surgery are internal fistula or abscess (30–38% of patients) and obstruction (35–37% of patients). Psoas abscess may result from ileocolic Crohn’s dis-ease. Sepsis should be controlled with percutaneous drainage of abscess(es) and antibiotics, if possible. Parenteral nutrition may be necessary in patients with chronic obstruction. The extent of resection depends on the amount of involved intestine. Short segments of inflamed small intestine and right colon should be resected and a primary anastomosis created if the patient is sta-ble, nutrition is adequate, and immunosuppression is minimal. Isolated chronic strictures should also be resected. In patients with multiple fibrotic strictures that would require extensive small bowel resection, stricturoplasty is a safe and effective alternative to resection. Short strictures are amenable to a trans-verse stricturoplasty, while longer strictures may be treated with a side-to-side small bowel anastomosis (Fig. 29-18).ABCDEFigure 29-18. Alternative stricturoplasty techniques.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease. Treatment for mild and severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Sudden onset of mental status changes, emesis, and liver dysfunction after taking aspirin. A child has loss of red light reﬂex. Diagnosis? Neuroblastoma. Esophageal atresia with distal TEF (85%). Unable to pass NG tube. Mild illness and/or low-grade fever, current antibiotic therapy, and prematurity. Ophthalmologic exam, CT, and MRI. CF or Hirschsprung’s disease. Duodenal atresia. Correct metabolic abnormalities. Then correct pyloric stenosis with pyloromyotomy.
(Reproduced with permission from Makary MA, Epstein J, Pronovost PJ, et al. Surgical specimen identification errors: a new mea-sure of quality in surgical care, Surgery. 2007 Apr;141(4):450-455. )have incorporated them, such as intensive care and anesthesia, have made impressive strides in patient safety. Currently, com-munication breakdowns, information loss, hand off, multiple competing tasks, and high workload are considered “annoy-ing but accepted features” of the perioperative environment.20 As physician attitudes toward errors, stress, and teamwork in medicine become more favorable toward the common goals of reducing error and improving teamwork and communication, medicine will likely achieve many of the milestones in safety that high-reliability industries such as aviation have already accomplished.COMPREHENSIVE UNIT-BASED SAFETY PROGRAMAs medical care and hospitals continue to expand, the care that is provided to patients is becoming more fragmented. This frag-mentation makes communication more difficult and opportuni-ties for medical errors more common. These problems require common sense solutions, often necessitating a change in the way that care is delivered on the local level. Unit-based meetings to discuss processes that are potentially dangerous for patients can quickly bring danger areas out into the open. These meetings Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40420/02/19   3:57 PM 405QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12Case 12-3 Inadequate sign out leading to medical errorJosie King was an 18-month-old child who was admitted to Johns Hopkins Hospital in January of 2001 for firstand second-degree burns. She spent 10 days in the pediatric intensive care unit and was well on her way to recovery. She was transferred to an intermediate care floor with the expectation that she would be sent home in a few days.The following week, her central line was removed, but nurses would not allow Josie to drink anything by mouth. Around 1 pm the next day, a nurse came to Josie’s bedside with a syringe of methadone. Although Josie’s mother told the nurse that there was no order for narcotics, the nurse insisted that the orders had been changed and administered the drug. Josie’s heart stopped, and her eyes became fixed. She was moved to the pediatric intensive care unit and placed on life support.
Van Dongen CJJ, van der Belt AGM, Prins MH, et al. Fixed dose subcutaneous low molecular weight heparins versus adjusted dose unfractionated heparin for venous thromboem-bolism. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD001100. 39. Kikta MJ, Keller MP, Humphrey PW, et al. Can low molecular weight heparins and heparinoids be safely given to patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia syndrome? Surgery. 1993;114:705-710. 40. Koopman MM, Prandoni P, Piovella F, et al. Treatment of venous thrombosis with intravenous unfractionated heparin administered in the hospital as compared with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin administered at home. The Tas-man Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:682-687.
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment? The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of virtually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regulation of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the gravitational stress of standing). The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see Chapter 6). Also, in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter.
Accurately predicting acute Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144401/03/19   6:44 PM 1445PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-7Ranson’s prognostic signs of pancreatitisCriteria for acute pancreatitis not due to gallstonesAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >55 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >16,000/mm3 BUN elevation >5 mg/dL Blood glucose >200 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >350 IU/L Arterial PO2 <60 mmHg Serum AST >250 U/dL Base deficit >4 mEq/L  Estimated fluid sequestration >6 LCriteria for acute gallstone pancreatitisAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >70 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >18,000/mm3 BUN elevation >2 mg/dL Blood glucose >220 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >400 IU/L Base deficit >5 mEq/L Serum AST >250 U/dL Estimated fluid sequestration >4 LNote: Fewer than three positive criteria predict mild, uncomplicated disease, whereas more than six positive criteria predict severe disease with a mortality risk of 50%.Abbreviations: AST = aspartate transaminase; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; PO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; WBC = white blood cell count.Data from Ranson JHC. Etiological and prognostic factors in human acute pancreatitis: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 1982;77:633 and from Ranson JH, Rifkind KM, Roses DF, et al. Prognostic signs and the role of operative management in acute pancreatitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1974;139:69.pancreatitis severity is important in making triage decisions about whether a patient should be transferred to a tertiary hospital or an intensive care unit and in making decisions about fluid therapy and whether an ERCP is indicated, as well as other issues.65 There is a very long history of attempts to find prognostic or predictive markers that accurately stratify the risk, with the most widely used being the Ranson’s criteria (Table 33-7) or modified Glasgow criteria. Both use clinical and biochemical parameters scored over the first 48 hours of admission. When there are three or more positive criteria, the disease is considered “predicted severe.” There are many other approaches to predicting severity. At 24 hours after admission an APACHE II score of 8 or more or a serum C-reactive protein level of >150 mg/dL has a similar accuracy in predicting severity as Ranson’s criteria.66 The more recently proposed Bedside Index for Severity of Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP) is calculated from blood urea nitrogen (> 25 mg/dL), impaired mental status (GCS <15), presence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, age >60 years, and pleural effusion. Although it has the advantage of simplicity and can be performed within the first 24 hours of admission, it performed no better than other predictors.67 The presence of SIRS also has prognostic significance.68 There remains some controversy as to how important obesity is as a risk factor for severe and critical acute pancreatitis.69 Another approach has been taken in seeking to predict those with the “harmless acute pancreatitis score”70 using three factors that can be determined on admission: absence of rebound tenderness or guarding, normal hematocrit, and normal serum creatinine. The accuracy of this approach appears to be over 90% and triages most patients away from intensive care.Unfortunately, these and many other single and combined predictors of severity have an accuracy of around 70%66. This means that there is misclassification error of 30% that limits the value in predicting the severity of acute pancreatitis in indi-vidual patients. In the absence of any new biomarkers of pancre-atitis severity, making better use of existing predictors through sequencing tests, combining tests, or using artificial neural network methodologies has shown some promise.71 Scoring systems should augment clinical judgment, but not replace it.64 Over the first 2 to 3 days the clinician must be alert to patients with an elevated BUN or creatinine and/or persistent SIRS after adequate fluid resuscitation because these patients are at risk of developing severe acute pancreatitis.64Classification of SeverityAccurately classifying or staging acute pancreatitis severity is important for clinical decision-making, communication, and enrolment into trials. The wide spectrum of pancreatitis severity was not captured in the previous binary classifica-tions (mild or severe).
The patient should be informed about the kind of diabetes he or she has and the rationale for controlling the glucose levels (see Box: Benefits of Tight Glycemic Control in Diabetes). Self-monitoring of glucose levels should be emphasized, especially if the patient is on insulin or oral secretagogues that can cause hypoglycemia. The patient on insulin therapy should understand the action profile of the insulins. He or she should know how to determine if the basal insulin dose is correct and how to adjust the rapidly acting insulin dose for carbohydrate content of meals. Insulin adjustments for exercise and infections should be discussed. The patient and family members also should be informed about the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia. The American Diabetes Association criteria for acceptable control include an HbA1c of less than 7% (53 mmol/mol) and pre-meal glucose levels of 90–130 mg/dL (5–7.2 mmol/L) and less than 180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L) one hour and 150 mg/dL (8.3 mmol/L) two hours after meals. While the HbA1c target is appropriate for individuals treated with lifestyle interventions and euglycemic therapy, it may need to be modified for individuals treated with insulin or insulin secretagogues due to their increased risk of hypoglycemia. Less stringent blood glucose control also is appropriate for children as well as patients with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, and significant microvascular and macrovascular disease. For the elderly frail patient an HbA1c greater than 8% may be appropriate. Treatment must be individualized on the basis of the type of diabetes and specific needs of each patient. A. Type 1 Diabetes

For most type 1 patients, at least 3 or 4 insulin injections a day are necessary for safe and effective control of glucose levels. A combination of rapidly acting insulin analogs and long-acting insulin analogs allow for more physiologic insulin replacement. Generally, for an adult with type 1 diabetes, the total daily insulin requirement in units is equal to the weight in pounds divided by four, or 0.55 times the person’s weight in kilograms.
Hypoglycemia during the night or excessive variability in the morning glucose concentrations should prompt additional testing at 2 or 3 am to ensure that there is no consistent hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. During periods of illness or when blood glucose concentrations are higher than 300 mg/dL, urine ketones also should be tested. Continuous glucose monitors, which provide minute-to-minute blood glucose concentration information, can be useful in following

Table 171-2 Representative Profiles of Insulin INSULIN ONSET PEAK ACTION DURATION Very Short Acting Lispro, aspart, glulisine 5−15 minutes 30−90 minutes 3−5 hours

Data from Wolfsdorf JI, editor: Intensive Diabetes Management, ed 4, Alexandria, VA, 2009, American Diabetes Associations. trends of blood glucose concentrations but should not be used in calculations of mealtime insulin doses. Measurements of glycohemoglobin or hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c) reflect the average blood glucose concentration over the preceding 3 months and provide a means for assessing long-term glycemic control. HgbA1c should be measured four times a year, and the results should be used for counseling of patients. The American Diabetes Association has set HgbA1c targets based on age with children less than 6 years having an HgbA1c target of 7.5% to 8.5%, ages 6 to 13 years HgbA1c target of less than 8%, and ages 13 to 18 years HgbA1c target of less than 7.5%. Measurements of HgbA1c are inaccurate in patients with hemoglobinopathies. Glycosylated albumin or fructosamine can be used in these cases. Patients with DM1 for more than 3 to 5 years should receive an annual ophthalmologic examination for retinopathy. Urine should be collected annually for assessment of microalbuminuria, which suggests early renal dysfunction and indicates a high risk of progression to nephropathy. Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors may halt the progression of microalbuminuria. In children with DM1, annual cholesterol measurements and periodic assessment of blood pressure are recommended. Early detection of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia with appropriate intervention can help limit future risk of coronary disease. Chronic autoimmune lymphocytic thyroiditis is particularly common and can result in hypothyroidism.
This chapter discusses classes of such medications but does not describe every glucose-lowering agent available worldwide. The initial step is to select an individualized, glycemic goal for the patient. Because the complications of DM are related to glycemic control, normoglycemia or near-normoglycemia is the desired, but often elusive, goal for most patients. Normalization or near-normalization of the plasma glucose for long periods of time is extremely difficult, as demonstrated by the DCCT and United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS). Regardless of the level of hyperglycemia, improvement in glycemic control will lower the risk of diabetes-specific complications (Chap. 419). The target for glycemic control (as reflected by the HbA1c) must be individualized, and the goals of therapy should be developed in consultation with the patient after considering a number of medical, social, and lifestyle issues. The ADA calls this a patient-centered approach, and other organizations such as the IDF and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) also suggest an individualized glycemic goal. Important factors to consider include the patient’s age and ability to understand and implement a complex treatment regimen, presence and severity of complications of diabetes, known cardiovascular disease (CVD), ability to recognize hypoglycemic symptoms, presence of other medical conditions or treatments that might affect survival or the response to therapy, lifestyle and occupation (e.g., possible consequences of experiencing hypoglycemia on the job), and level of support available from family and friends. In general, the ADA suggests that the goal is to achieve an HbA1c as close to normal as possible without significant hypoglycemia. In most individuals, the target HbA1c should be <7% (Table 418-2) with a more stringent target for some patients. For instance, the HbA1c goal in a young adult with type 1 DM may be 6.5%. A higher HbA1c goal may be appropriate for the very young or old or in individuals with limited life span or comorbid conditions. For example, an appropriate HbA1c goal in elderly individuals with multiple, chronic illnesses and impaired activities of daily living might be 8.0 or 8.5%. A major consideration is the frequency and severity of hypoglycemia, because this becomes more common with a more stringent HbA1c goal.
Regular insulin is required during DKA as an initial bolus of 0.1 U/kg body weight (BW) IV, followed immediately by a continuous infusion of 0.1 U/kg BW per hour in NS. The effectiveness of IV insulin (not subcutaneous) can be tracked by observing the decline in plasma ketones. Because the increment in the AG above the normal value of 10 meq/L represents accumulated ketoacids in DKA, the disappearance of ketoacid anions is reflected by the narrowing and eventual correction of the AG. Typically, the plasma AG returns to normal within 8–12 h.

3. Replace potassium deficits. Although patients with DKA often have hyperkalemia due to insulin deficiency, they are usually severely K+ depleted. KCl (20 meq/L) should be added to each liter of IV fluids when urine output is established and insulin has been administered. 4. Correct the metabolic acidosis. The plasma bicarbonate concentration will usually not increase for several hours because of dilution from administered IV NaCl. The plasma [HCO−] approaches 18 meq/L once ketoacidosis disappears. Sodium bicarbonate therapy is often not recommended or necessary and is contraindicated

CHAPTER 64e Fluid and Electrolyte Imbalances and Acid-Base Disturbances: Case Examples 64e-2 for children. Bicarbonate is administered to adults with DKA for extreme acidemia (pH <7.1); for elderly patients (>70 years old), a threshold pH of 7.20 is recommended. Sodium bicarbonate, if administered, should only be given in small amounts. Because ketoacids are metabolized in response to insulin therapy, bicarbonate will be added to the ECF as ketoacids are converted.
As a result of recent controversies about the optimal glycemic goal and concerns about safety, the FDA now requires information about the cardiovascular safety profile as part of its evaluation of new treatments for type 2 DM. Individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM and severe hyperglycemia (>16.7 mmol/L [300 mg/dL]) should be assessed for clinical stability, including mentation and hydration. Depending on the patient and the rapidity and duration of the severe hyperglycemia, an individual may require more intense and rapid therapy to lower the blood glucose. However, many patients with poorly controlled diabetes and hyperglycemia have few symptoms. The physician should assess if the patient is stable or if diabetic ketoacidosis or a hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state should be considered. Ketones, an indicator of diabetic ketoacidosis, should be measured in individuals with type 1 DM when the plasma glucose is >16.7 mmol/L (300 mg/dL), during a concurrent illness, or with symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain. Blood measurement of β-hydroxybutyrate is preferred over urine testing with nitroprusside-based assays that measure only acetoacetate and acetone. Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) are acute, severe disorders directly related to diabetes. DKA was formerly considered a hallmark of type 1 DM, but also occurs in individuals who lack immunologic features of type 1 DM and who can sometimes subsequently be treated with oral glucose-lowering agents (these obese individuals with type 2 DM are often of Hispanic or African-American descent). HHS is primarily seen in individuals with type 2 DM. Both disorders are associated with absolute or relative insulin deficiency, volume depletion, and acid-base abnormalities. DKA and HHS exist along a continuum of hyperglycemia, with or without ketosis. The metabolic similarities and differences in DKA and HHS are highlighted in Table 418-6. Both

Diabetes Mellitus: Management and Therapies aLarge changes occur during treatment of DKA. bAlthough plasma levels may be normal or high at presentation, total-body stores are usually depleted.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Plasma Na+ concentration was initially 129 meq/L, decreasing within 3 days to 118–120 meq/L despite fluid restriction to 1 L/d. A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a right 2.8 × 1.6 cm infrahilar mass and postobstructive pneumonia. The patient was an active smoker. Past medical history was notable for laryngeal carcinoma treated 15 years prior with radiation therapy, renal cell carcinoma, peripheral vascular disease, and hypothyroidism. On review of systems, he denied headache, nausea, and vomiting. He had chronic hip pain, managed with acetaminophen with codeine. Other medications included cilostazol, amoxicillin/clavulanate, digoxin, diltiazem, and thyroxine. He was euvolemic on examination, with no lymphadenopathy and a normal chest examination. Na+ 120 K+ 4.3 Cl− 89 HCO3− 23 BUN 8 Creat 1.0 Glu 93

Alb 3.1 Ca 8.9 Phos 2.8 Mg 2.0 Plasma osm 248 mOsm/kg

Cortisol 25 μg/dL TSH 2.6 Uric acid 2.7 mg/dL

Urine: Na+ 97 K+ 22 Cl− 86 Osm 597

The patient was treated with furosemide, 20 mg PO bid, and salt tablets. The plasma Na+ concentration increased to 129 meq/L with this therapy; however, the patient developed orthostatic hypotension and dizziness. He was started on demeclocycline, 600 mg PO in the morning and 300 mg in the evening, just before discharge from hospital. Plasma Na+ concentration increased to 140 meq/L with a BUN of 23 and creatinine of 1.4, at which point demeclocycline was reduced to 300 mg PO bid. Bronchoscopic biopsy eventually showed small-cell lung cancer; the patient declined chemotherapy and was admitted to hospice. What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options?
331. Portmann L, Hamada N, Heinrich G, et al. Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease: possible identity with anti-microsomal antibody. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1985;61:1001–1003. 332. Czarnocka B, Ruf J, Ferrand M, et al. Purification of the human thyroid peroxidase and its identification as the microsomal antigen involved in autoimmune thyroid diseases. FEBS Lett 1985;190:147– 152. 333. World Heath Organization. Assessment of iodine deficiency disorders and monitoring their elimination. A guide for program managers. Geneva: WHO, 2007:1–108. 334. Laurberg P, Cerqueira C, Ovesen L, et al.
Abalovich M, Amino N, Barbour LA, et al. Management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy and postpartum: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92(8 Suppl):S1–S47. 374. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. ACOG practice bulletin. Thyroid disease in pregnancy. Number 37. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2002;79:171–180. 375. Mariotti S, Caturegli P, Piccolo P, et al. Antithyroid peroxidase autoantibodies in thyroid diseases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;71:661–669. 376. Endo T, Kaneshige M, Nakazato M, et al.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Eur ] Obstet Gynecol Reprod Bioi 76: 147, 1998

Kulandavelu S, Whiteley KJ, Bainbridge SA, et al: Endothelial NO synthase augments fetoplacental blood low, placental vascularization, and fetal growth in mice. Hypertension 61(1):259, 2013

Kumru S, Boztosun A, Godekmerdan A: Pregnancy-associated changes in peripheral blood lymphocyte subpopulations and serum cytokine concentrations in healthy women. J Reprod Med 50:246, 2005

Lankhorst S, Jan Danser AH, van den Meiracker AH: Endothelin-l and antiangiogenesis. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp PhysioIr310:R230, 2016

La Rocca C, Carbone F, Longobardi S, et al: The immunology of pregnancy: regulatory T cells control maternal immune tolerance toward the fetus. Immunol Lett 162:41,r2014

Larsson A, Palm M, Hansson LO, et al: Reference values for clinical chemistry tests during normal pregnancy. BjOG 11r5:874,r2008

Laskowska M, Laskowska K, Oleszczuk J: he relation of maternal serum eNOS, NOSTRlN and ADNiA levels with aetiopathogenesis of preeclampsia and/or intrauterine fetal growth resrriction. J Maten Fetal Neonatal Med 28:26,r2015

Lederman SA, Paxton A, Heymsfield SB, et al: Maternal body fat and water during pregnancy: do they raise infant birth weight? Am ] Obstet Gynecol 180:235, 1999

Lee DH, Park K: Isolated fallopian tube torsion during pregnancy: a case report. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 42:681, 2015

Lee HR, Song JE, Lee KY: Developed diplopia and ptosis due to a nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Sci 57:66,r2014

Leung AM: Thyroid function in pregnancy. J Trace Elem Med Bioi 26(2-3): lr,r2012

Lim PS, Ng SP, Shaiee MN, et al: Spontaneous rupture of uterine varicose veins: a rare cause for obstetric shock. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40: 1791, 2014

Lim R, Acharya R, Delpachitra P, et al: Activin and NADPH-oxidase in preeclampsia: insights from in vitro and murine studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:86.el, 2015

Lind T, Bell S, Gilmore E, et al: Insulin disappearance rate in pregnant and non-pregnant women, and in non-pregnant women given GHRIH. Eur ] Clin Invest 7:47, 1977

Lindheimer MD, Davison ]M, Katz AI: he kidney and hypertension in pregnancy: twenty exciting years. Semin NephroI21:173, 2001

Lindheimer MD, Griinfeld ]P, Davison ]M: Renal disorders.
Eur J Endocrinol 2004;150:605–618. 367. Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, Allan WC, et al. Maternal thyroid deficiency during pregnancy and subsequent neuropsychological development of the child. N Engl J Med 1999;341:549–555. 368. Baskin HJ, Cobin RH, Duick DS, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists medical guidelines for clinical practice for the evaluation and treatment of hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism. Endocr Pract 2002;8:457–469. 369. Pearce EN. Thyroid dysfunction in perimenopausal and post-menopausal women. Menopause Int 2007;13:8–13. 370. Lazarus JH.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Presents as suprapubic pain, dysuria, urinary frequency, urgency. Systemic signs (eg, high fever, chills) are usually absent. Risk factors include female sex (short urethra), sexual intercourse, indwelling catheter, diabetes mellitus, impaired bladder emptying. Causes:

Staphylococcus saprophyticus—seen in sexually active young women (E coli is still more common in this group)

Proteus mirabilis—urine has ammonia scent Labs: ⊕ leukocyte esterase. ⊕ nitrites (indicate gram ⊝ organisms). Sterile pyuria (pyuria with ⊝ urine cultures) could suggest urethritis by Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis. Treatment: antibiotics (eg, TMP-SMX, nitrofurantoin). Acute pyelonephritis Neutrophils infiltrate renal interstitium A . Affects cortex with relative sparing of glomeruli/vessels. Presents with fevers, flank pain (costovertebral angle tenderness), nausea/vomiting, chills. Causes include ascending UTI (E coli is most common), hematogenous spread to kidney. Presents with WBCs in urine +/− WBC casts. CT would show striated parenchymal enhancement B . Risk factors include indwelling urinary catheter, urinary tract obstruction, vesicoureteral reflux, diabetes mellitus, pregnancy. Complications include chronic pyelonephritis, renal papillary necrosis, perinephric abscess, urosepsis.
Occasionally, vaginitis caused by C. albicans or trichomonas is associated with dysuria. On careful questioning, patients generally describe external dysuria, sometimes associated with vaginal discharge, and pruritus and dyspareunia. They usually do not experience urgency or frequency. Pyuria and hematuria are absent. Acute Pyelonephritis The clinical spectrum of acute, uncomplicated pyelonephritis in young women ranges from gram-negative septicemia to a cystitislike illness with mild ﬂank pain. E. coli accounts for more than 80% of these cases (58). Microscopy of unspun urine reveals pyuria and gram-negative bacteria. A urine culture should be obtained in all women with suspected pyelonephritis; blood cultures should be performed in those who are hospitalized because results are positive in 15% to 20% of cases. In the absence of nausea and vomiting and severe illness, outpatient oral therapy can be given safely. Patients who have nausea and vomiting, are moderately to severely ill, or are pregnant should be hospitalized. Outpatient treatment regimens include trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg every 12 hours for 14 days) or a quinolone (e.g., levoﬂoxacin, 750 mg daily for 7 days). Inpatient treatment regimens include the use of parenteral levoﬂoxacin (750 mg daily), ceftriaxone (1–2 g daily), ampicillin (1 g every 6 hours), and gentamicin (especially if Enterococcus species are suspected) or aztreonam (1 g every 8–12 hours). Symptoms should resolve after 48 to 72 hours. If fever and ﬂank pain persist after 72 hours of therapy, ultrasound or computed tomography should be considered to rule out a perinephric or intrarenal abscess or ureteral obstruction. A follow-up culture should be obtained 2 weeks after the completion of therapy (60).
II. CYSTITIS

A. Infection of the bladder

B. Presents as dysuria, urinary frequency, urgency, and suprapubic pain; systemic signs (e.g., fever) are usually absent. C. Laboratory findings 1. Urinalysis-cloudy urine with > 10 WBCs/high power field (hpf) 2. Dipstick-Positive leukocyte esterase (due to pyuria) and nitrites (bacteria convert nitrates to nitrites) 3. Culture-greater than 100,000 colony forming units (gold standard)

D. Etiology 1. E coli (80%) 2. Staphylococcus saprophyticus-increased incidence in young, sexually active women (but E coli is still more common in this population) 3. Klebsiella pneumoniae 4. Proteus mirabilis-alkaline urine with ammonia scent

Fig. 12.15 Linear IF, Goodpasture syndrome. Fig. 12.16 lgA nephropathy. (Courtesy ofTony (Courtesy ofTony Chang, MD) Chang, MD) 5.
If fever and ﬂank pain persist after 72 hours of therapy, ultrasound or computed tomography should be considered to rule out a perinephric or intrarenal abscess or ureteral obstruction. A follow-up culture should be obtained 2 weeks after the completion of therapy (60). 1. Huggins GR, Preti G. Vaginal odors and secretions. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1981;24:355–377. 2. Larsen B. Microbiology of the female genital tract. In: Pastorek J, ed. Obstetric and gynecologic infectious disease. New York: Raven Press, 1994:11–26. 3. Eschenbach DA, Davick PR, Williams BL, et al. Prevalence of hydrogen peroxide-producing Lactobacillus species in normal women and women with vaginal vaginosis. J Clin Microbiol 1989;27:251– 256. 4.
TQ5. What response to the DKA is apparent in MW? What response is likely occurring in the kidney? Hint: In addition to conversion to urea, how is toxic ammonia removed from the body? TQ6. What would be true about the levels of ketone bodies and glucose during periods of physiologic stress in individuals with impaired FA oxidation? Case 4: Hypoglycemia, Hyperketonemia, and Liver Dysfunction

Patient Presentation: AK, a 59-year-old male with slurred speech, ataxia (loss of skeletal muscle coordination), and abdominal pain, was dropped off at the Emergency Department (ED). Focused History: AK is known to the ED staff from previous visits. He has a 6year history of chronic, excessive alcohol consumption. He is not known to take illicit drugs. At this ED visit, AK reports that he has been drinking heavily in the past day or so. He cannot recall having eaten anything in that time. There is evidence of recent vomiting, but no blood is apparent. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): The physical examination was remarkable for AK’s emaciated appearance. (His body mass index was later determined to be 17.5, which put him in the underweight category.)
Qiang M, Denny AD, Ticku MK: Chronic intermittent ethanol treatment selectively alters N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit surface expression in cultured cortical neurons. Mol Pharmacol 2007;72:95. Seitz HK, Stickel F: Molecular mechanisms of alcohol-mediated carcinogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:599. Srisurapanont M, Jarusuraisin N: Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;1:CD001867. Wolf FW, Heberlein U: Invertebrate models of drug abuse. J Neurobiol 2003;54:161. This young man exhibited classic signs and symptoms of acute alcohol poisoning, which is confirmed by the blood alcohol concentration. We do not know from the case whether the patient was tolerant to the effects of alcohol but note that his blood alcohol concentration was in the lethal range for a nontolerant individual. Death most likely resulted from respi-ratory and cardiovascular collapse prior to medical treatment, complicated by a chemical pneumonitis secondary to aspira-tion of vomitus. The treatment of acute alcohol poisoning includes standard supportive care of airway, breathing, and circulation (“ABCs,” see Chapter 58). Most importantly, the trachea would be intubated, vomitus removed, and mechani-cal ventilation begun. Intravenous access would be obtained and used to administer dextrose and thiamine, as well as elec-trolytes and vitamins. If a young, previously healthy individual receives medical care in time, supportive care will most likely be highly effective.
Document height and weight and calculate body mass index (BMI). A BMI <18.5 kg/m2 places an individual at risk and should prompt referral for full nutritional assessment.2. Measure baseline serum albumin and prealbumin levels. Serum albumin <3.0 g/dL (with no evidence of hepatic or renal dysfunction) should prompt referral for full nutritional assessment.3. Inquire about unintentional weight loss in the last year. Unintentional weight loss >10% to 15% in the past 6 months is associated with severe nutritional risk and should prompt assessment by a dietician.22The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) argues that measurement of serum albumin and pre-albumin reflect the severity of the inflammatory response rather than true poor nutritional status. Instead, they favor a more indi-vidualized approach whereby the presence of any of the follow-ing six factors would classify an individual with malnutrition:1. Insufficient energy intake. Severe malnutrition in the context of chronic illness is defined as <75% of estimated energy requirement for ≥1 month.2. Weight loss. Severe malnutrition in the context of chronic illness is defined as >5% weight loss in 1 month, >7.5% weight loss in 3 months, >10% weight loss in 6 months, and >20% weight loss in 1 year.3. Loss of muscle mass. Severe malnutrition is defined as severe muscle wasting of the temples, clavicles, shoulders, interosseous muscles, scapula, thigh, and calf.4. Loss of subcutaneous fat. Severe malnutrition is defined as loss of subcutaneous fat (e.g., orbital, triceps, fat overlying the ribs).5.
Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): The physical examination was remarkable for AK’s emaciated appearance. (His body mass index was later determined to be 17.5, which put him in the underweight category.) His facial cheeks were erythematous (red in color) due to dilated blood vessels in the skin (telangiectasia). Eye movement was normal. Neither icterus (jaundice) nor edema (swelling due to fluid retention) was seen. The liver was slightly enlarged. Bedside tests revealed hypoglycemia and hyperketonemia (as acetoacetate). Blood was drawn and sent to the clinical laboratory. Pertinent Test Results:

DUI = driving under the influence; H = High; L = Low. Additional Tests: Complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear revealed a macrocytic anemia (see right image). Folate and B12 levels were ordered. Diagnosis: AK is diagnosed with alcoholism. Treatment (Immediate): Thiamine and glucose were given intravenously. Prognosis: Alcoholism (alcohol dependence) is the third most common cause of preventable death in the United States. People with alcoholism are at increased risk for liver cirrhosis, pancreatitis, gastrointestinal bleeding, and some cancers.
A four-year-old child presents with oliguria, petechiae, and jaundice following an illness with bloody diarrhea. Most likely diagnosis and cause? Post-HBV exposure treatment. Classic causes of drug-induced hepatitis. A 40-year-old obese woman with elevated alkaline phosphatase, elevated bilirubin, pruritus, dark urine, and clay-colored stools. Hernia with highest risk of incarceration—indirect, direct, or femoral? A 50-year-old man with a history of alcohol abuse presents with boring epigastric pain that radiates to the back and is relieved by sitting forward. Management? Establish the ABCs. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) due to E. coli O157: H7. HBV immunoglobulin. TB medications (INH, rifampin, pyrazinamide), acetaminophen, and tetracycline. Biliary tract obstruction. Femoral hernia. Confirm the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis with elevated amylase and lipase.
Patients progressively lose low-frequency hearing over years and may become deaf on the affected side. Dx: Diagnosis is made clinically and is based on a thorough history and physical exam. Two episodes (lasting 20 minutes or more) with remission of symptoms between episodes, hearing loss documented at least once with audiometry, and tinnitus or aural fullness are needed to make the diagnosis once other causes (e.g., TIA, otosyphilis) have been ruled out. A brain

MRI with vascular imaging (e.g., MRA) may help assess potential intracranial pathology, particularly cerebrovascular disease. ■ Tx: Classically, a low-sodium diet and diuretic therapy were first-line treatments. As theories of pathogenesis have shifted, many clinicians have begun to treat patients with “migraine” diets, other lifestyle changes, prophylactic antimigraine medications, and occasionally benzodiazepines or antiemetics. For severe unilateral cases, ablative therapies (e.g., intratympanic gentamicin to damage the labyrinth, vestibular nerve section) have been used with some success. A cause of recurrent vertigo (usually without auditory symptoms) that affects roughly 10% of migraine sufferers. More common among females. Its pathogenesis may be related to intermittent electrical (ion channel) dysfunction in the cerebellum. Hx/PE: Presents with recurrent episodes of mild dizziness to severe vertigo lasting minutes to days. Nausea, vomiting, and photophobia are common; headaches are variably present and may be mild or severe. Patients are left with no substantial deficits in between spells, although balance may deteriorate over decades. Dx:

The diagnosis is usually made clinically on the basis of a thorough history and physical exam to exclude other causes. Patients who would otherwise qualify for a diagnosis of Ménière’s save the absence of auditory symptoms and documented hearing loss are likely to have vestibular migraine.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Nystagmus that persists for > 1 minute, gait disturbance, or nausea/ vomiting that is out of proportion to nystagmus should raise concern for a central lesion. Tx:

Some 80% of cases can be resolved at the bedside using the modified Epley maneuver (a 270-degree head rotation from the Dix-Hallpike testing position). With BPPV, it’s all in the name:

Benign = otolith (not a tumor). Paroxysmal = sudden, temporary episodes lasting < 1 minute. Positional = starts while turning in bed or reaching overhead. Vertigo = vertigo or dizziness is the main symptom. If you see a 27-year-old male who presents with vertigo and vomiting for one week after having been diagnosed with a viral infection, think acute vestibular neuritis. ■The condition usually subsides spontaneously in weeks to months but often recurs months or years later. Antivertigo medications (e.g., meclizine) are generally contraindicated, as they tend to inhibit central compensation, which may lead to chronic unsteadiness and falls in the elderly. Typically a diagnosis of exclusion once the more serious causes of vertigo (e.g., cerebellar stroke) have been ruled out. Hx/PE: Presents with acute onset of severe vertigo, head-motion intolerance, and gait unsteadiness accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and nystagmus. Auditory or aural symptoms (“labyrinthitis”) may include unilateral tinnitus, ear fullness, or hearing loss. Without auditory or aural symptoms (more common), the condition is known as “vestibular neuritis.”

Dx:

Acute peripheral vestibulopathy demonstrates the following:

An abnormal vestibulo-ocular reﬂex (VOR) as determined by a bedside head impulse test (i.e., rapid head rotation from lateral to center while staring at the examiner’s nose). A predominantly horizontal nystagmus that always beats in one direction, opposite the lesion. No vertical eye misalignment by alternate cover testing.
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
25. Ingelsson E, Lundholm C, Johansson ALV, et al. Hysterectomy and risk of cardiovascular disease: a population based cohort study. Eur Heart J 2011;32:745–750. 26. Parker WH, Broder MS, Liv Z, et al. Ovarian conservation at the time of hysterectomy for benign disease. Obstet Gynecol 2005;106: 219–226. 27. Ryan PJ, Harrison R, Blake GM, et al. Compliance with hormone replacement therapy (HRT) after screening for postmenopausal osteoporosis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;99:1325–1328. 28. Kauff ND, Satagopan JM, Robson ME, et al. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation.
Palmer AM: Neuroprotective therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease: Progress and prospects. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011;32:141. Press D, Alexander M: Treatment of dementia. www.uptodate.com 2014;topic 5073. Qaseem A et al: Treatment of low bone density or osteoporosis to prevent fractures in men and women: a clinical practice guideline update from the American College of Physicians. Ann Int Med 2017;doi: 10.7326/M15-1361. Qato DM et al: Use of prescription and over-the-counter medications and dietary supplements among older adults in the United States. JAMA 2008;300:2867. Rabow MW, Pantilat SZ: Palliative care and pain management. In: Papadakis MA, McPhee SJ, (editors): Current Medical Diagnosis & Treatment 2017, McGraw-Hill, 2017. Roberson ED, Mucke L: 100 years and counting: Prospects for defeating Alzheimer’s disease. Science 2006;314:781. Satizabal CL et al: Incidence of dementia over three decades in the Framingham Heart Study. N Engl J Med 2016;374:523. Sawhney R, Sehl M, Naeim A: Physiologic aspects of aging: Impact on cancer management and decision making, part I.
1. Type I primary osteoporosis occurs in post-menopausal women. Since this type appears at an earlier stage of life than type II, its long-term effect is usually more severe than osteoporosis that de-velops in the later years of life. 2. Type II primary osteoporosis occurs in elderly individuals in their seventh or eighth decade of life and is the leading cause of serious morbidity and functional loss in this age group. 3. Secondary osteoporosis develops as a result of drug therapy (i.e., corticosteroids) or disease pro-cesses that may affect bone remodeling, including malnutrition, prolonged immobilization, weightless-ness (i.e., with space travel), and metabolic bone dis-eases (i.e., hyperparathyroidism, metastatic cancers). Osteoporotic bone has normal histologic structure; however, there is less tissue mass (Fig. F8.2.1). This results in weakened bones that are more prone to fractures follow-ing even minor trauma. Femoral head and neck fractures (commonly known as hip fractures), wrist fractures, and compressed vertebrae fractures are common injuries that frequently disable and confine an elderly person to a wheelchair. Individuals suffering from fractures are at greater risk for death, not directly from the fracture, but from the complications of hospitalization because of immo-bilization and increased risk of pneumonia, pulmonary thrombosis, and embolism. Traditional treatment of individuals with osteoporosis in-cludes an improved diet with vitamin D and calcium sup-plementation and moderate exercise to help slow further bone loss. In addition to diet and exercise, pharmacologic therapy directed toward slowing down bone resorption is employed. Until recently, the treatment of choice in post-menopausal women with osteoporosis was hormone re-placement therapy with estrogen and progesterone.
Dangerous communicable diseases, such as TB or Ebola, may require involuntary treatment. Patient is not adherent. Attempt to identify the reason for nonadherence and determine his/her willingness to change; do not coerce the patient into adhering and do not refer him/her to another physician. A patient’s family member asks you not to disclose the results of a test if the prognosis is poor because the patient will be “unable to handle it.”

Attempt to identify why the family member believes such information would be detrimental to the patient’s condition. Explain that as long as the patient has decision-making capacity and does not indicate otherwise, communication of information concerning his/her care will not be withheld. However, if you believe the patient might seriously harm himself/herself or others if informed, then you may invoke therapeutic privilege and withhold the information. Patient is suicidal. Assess the seriousness of the threat. If it is serious, suggest that the patient remain in the hospital voluntarily; patient can be hospitalized involuntarily if he/she refuses. Discounted fee-for-Patient pays for each individual service at a discounted rate predetermined by providers and payers service (eg, PPOs). Medicare and Medicaid—federal social healthcare programs that originated from amendments to the Social Security Act. Medicare is available to patients ≥ 65 years old, < 65 with certain disabilities, and those with end-stage renal disease. Medicaid is joint federal and state health assistance for people with limited income and/ or resources. MedicarE is for Elderly. MedicaiD is for Destitute.
Exam reveals “doughy” skin and signs of volume depletion. Assess volume status by conducting a clinical exam and measuring urine volume and osmolality. Hypertonic Na+ gain: Due to hypertonic saline/tube feeds or ↑aldosterone (suppresses ADH). Pure water loss: Due to central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; characterized by large volumes of dilute urine. Do not neglect dermal and respiratory insensible losses. Hypotonic f uid loss: Due to ↓ intake, diuretics, intrinsic renal disease, GI losses (diarrhea), burns, and osmotic diuresis (mannitol, glucose in DKA, urea with high protein feeds). A minimal volume (approximately 500 ml/day) of maximally concentrated urine (> 800 mOsm/kg) suggests adequate renal response without adequate free-water replacement. Treat the underlying causes and replace free-water deficit with hypotonic saline, D5W, or oral water, depending on volume status. Correction of chronic hypernatremia (> 36–48 hours) should be accomplished gradually over 48–72 hours (≤ 0.5 mEq/L/hr) to prevent neurologic damage 2° to cerebral edema. Serum sodium < 135 mEq/L. Almost always due to ↑ ADH. May be asymptomatic or may present with confusion, lethargy, muscle cramps, hyporeﬂexia, and nausea. Can progress to seizures, coma, or brain stem herniation. Hyponatremia can be categorized according to serum and urine osmolality as well as by volume status (i.e., by clinical exam). Osmolality is classified as follows:

High (> 295 mEq/L): Hyperglycemia, hypertonic infusion (e.g., mannitol).
A 63-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a severe aspiration pneumonia. Past medical history included schizophrenia, for which he required institutional care; treatment had included neuroleptics and intermittent lithium, the latter restarted 6 months before admission. The patient was treated with antibiotics and intubated for several days, with the development of polyuria (3–5 L/d), hypernatremia, and acute renal insufficiency; the peak plasma Na+ concentration was 156 meq/L, and peak creatinine was 2.6 mg/dL. Urine osmolality was measured once and reported as 157 mOsm/kg, with a coincident plasma osmolality of 318 mOsm/kg. Lithium was stopped on admission to the ICU. On physical examination, the patient was alert, extubated, and thirsty. Weight was 97.5 kg. Urine output for the previous 24 h had been 3.4 L, with an IV intake of 2 L/d of D5W. After 3 days of intravenous hydration, a water deprivation test was performed. A single dose of 2 μg IV desmopressin (DDAVP) was given at 9 h (+9):

Why did the patient develop hypernatremia, polyuria, and acute renal insufficiency? What does the water deprivation test demonstrate? What is the underlying pathophysiology of this patient’s hypernatremic syndrome? This patient became polyuric after admission to the ICU with severe pneumonia, developing significant hypernatremia and acute renal insufficiency. Polyuria can result from either an osmotic diuresis or a water diuresis. An osmotic diuresis can be caused by excessive excretion of Na+-Cl−, mannitol, glucose, and/or urea, with a daily solute excretion of >750–1000 mOsm/d (>15 mOsm/kg body water per day).
3. Results in hyperglycemia (> 300 mg/dL), anion gap metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia 4. Presents with Kussmaul respirations, dehydration, nausea, vomiting, mental status changes, and fruity smelling breath (due to acetone) 5. Treatment is fluids (corrects dehydration from polyuria), insulin, and replacement of electrolytes (e.g., potassium). Ill. TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS

A. End-organ insulin resistance leading to a metabolic disorder characterized by hyperglycemia 1. Most common type of diabetes (90% of cases); affects 5-10% of the US population 2. Incidence is rising. B. Arises in middle-aged, obese adults 1. Obesity leads to decreased numbers of insulin receptors. 2. Strong genetic predisposition exists. C. Insulin levels are increased early in disease, but later, insulin deficiency develops due to beta cell exhaustion; histology reveals amyloid deposition in the islets (Fig. 15.12). D. Clinical features include polyuria, polydipsia, and hyperglycemia, but disease is often clinically silent.
The treatment goals for patients with diabetes are summarized in Table 418-2 and should be individualized. The morbidity and mortality rates of DM-related complications (Chap. 419) can be greatly reduced by timely and consistent surveillance procedures (Table 418-1). These screening procedures are indicated for all individuals with DM, but many individuals with diabetes do not receive comprehensive diabetes care. A comprehensive eye examination should be performed by a qualified optometrist or ophthalmologist. Because many individuals with type 2 DM have had asymptomatic diabetes for several years before diagnosis, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends the following ophthalmologic examination schedule: (1) individuals with type 1 DM should have an initial eye examination within 5 years of diagnosis, (2) individuals with type 2 DM should have an initial eye examination at the time of diabetes diagnosis, (3) women with DM who are pregnant or contemplating pregnancy should have an eye examination prior to conception and during the first trimester, and (4) if eye exam is normal, repeat examination in 2–3 years is appropriate. <7.0%c 4.4–7.2 mmol/L (80–130 mg/dL) <10.0 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL) <2.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL)g >1 mmol/L (40 mg/dL) in men >1.3 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) in women <1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL) aAs recommended by the American Diabetes Association; goals should be individualized for each patient (see text). Goals may be different for certain patient populations. bHbA1c is primary goal. cDiabetes Control and Complications Trial–based assay. d1–2 h after beginning of a meal. eGoal of <130/80 mmHg may be appropriate for younger individuals fIn decreasing order of priority. Recent guidelines from the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association no longer advocate specific LDL and HDL goals (see Chaps. 291e and 419). gGoal of <1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) may be appropriate for individuals with cardiovascular disease.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Swelling is rare,but limping may be associated with Sever disease. The childwill have pain to palpation of the posterior calcaneus and oftentight heel cords. Radiographs are rarely indicated, but with persistent pain they should be done to exclude infection or tumor. Activity modification, icing, and anti-inflammatory medications can be helpful. A program designed to improve heel cord flexibility and overall ankle strength may decrease symptoms. Heel elevation using heel wedges or heel cups can be helpful. Curly toes are the most common deformity of the lesser toes.The fourth and fifth toes are most commonly affected. Curlytoes are characterized by flexion at the proximal interphalangeal joint with lateral rotation of the toe. It is caused bycontractures of the flexor digitorum brevis and longus tendons. Some curly toes will spontaneously resolve by 3 to 4years of age. Persistent deformity may be treated by surgical tenotomy. Polydactyly (extra toes) is usually found on the initial newborn physical examination. When the extra toe is adjacent to the fifth toe and attached by only a stalk of soft tissue or skin, simple ligation or amputation is effective. When the deformity involves the great toe or middle toes, or when the extra digit has cartilage or bone, delayed surgical intervention is indicated. Syndactyly (fusion of toes) is more common than polydactyly.
The blood supply to the femoral head is from three sources—the artery within the ligament of the head of the femur, vessels in the medullary cavity, and vessels deep to the synovium running in the retinacula of the fibrous capsule of the hip joint. With increasing age, the medullary cavity undergoes fatty replacement of the normal red marrow, thus attenuating the medullary blood supply. The artery within the ligament of the head of the femur also becomes attenuated and this is often associated with atherosclerotic arterial disease. Unfortunately for this patient, the sole blood supply to the head of the femur was via the vessels in the retinacula fibers, which were transected at the time of the fracture. If the patient had an intertrochanteric fracture instead, the vessels of the retinacula fibers would not have been damaged and a different approach to surgical fixation could be undertaken without the need for a hemiarthroplasty. The patient has osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a common condition affecting older people, but is significantly more frequent in postmenopausal women. Many fractures of the femoral neck in elderly patients occur because the strength of the bone is significantly reduced when it is osteoporotic. Other common sites for osteoporotic fractures include the distal radius and the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. A 28-year-old woman was seen by her family practitioner for a routine pregnancy checkup at 36 weeks’ gestational age. Neither the patient nor the family physician had any concerns about the pregnancy. However, the patient did complain of unilateral swelling of her left leg, which had gradually increased over the previous 2 days. Furthermore, the evening before her visit she developed some sharp chest pain, which was exacerbated by deep breaths. The family physician ordered a duplex ultrasound scan of the left leg venous system. Ultrasound scanning of the vascular tree can demonstrate flow and occlusion of arteries and veins.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
In patients with chronic debilitating medial epicondylitis that remains unresponsive after at least a year of treatment, surgical release of the flexor muscle at its origin may be necessary and is often successful. Plantar fasciitisis a common cause of footpain in adults,with thepeak incidence occurring in people betweenthe agesof 40and 60 years. The painoriginatesatornearthesiteoftheplantarfasciaattachmenttothe medialtuberosity of the calcaneus.Severalfactorsthatincrease therisk of developing plantar fasciitis include obesity, pes planus (flat foot or absence of the foot arch when standing), pes cavus (high-arched foot), limited dorsiflexion of the ankle, prolonged standing, walking on hard surfaces, and faulty shoes. In runners, excessive running and a change to a harder running surface may precipitate plantar fasciitis. The diagnosis of plantar fasciitis can usually be made on the basis of history and physical examination alone. Patients experience severe pain with the first steps on arising in the morning or following inactivity during the day. The pain usually lessens with weight-bearing activityduringtheday,onlytoworsenwithcontinuedactivity.Painismade worse on walking barefoot or up stairs. On examination, maximal tendernessis elicitedonpalpation over the inferiorheel corresponding to the site of attachment of the plantar fascia. Imaging studies may be indicated when the diagnosis is not clear. Plain radiographs may show heel spurs, which are of little diagnostic significance. Ultrasonography in plantar fasciitis can demonstrate thickening of the fascia and diffuse hypoechogenicity, indicating edema at the attachment of the plantar fascia to the calcaneus. MRI is a sensitive method for detecting plantar fasciitis, but it is usually not required for establishing the diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of inferior heel pain includes calcaneal stress fractures, the spondyloarthritides, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, neoplastic or infiltrative bone processes, and nerve compression/ entrapment syndromes. Resolutionofsymptomsoccurswithin12monthsinmorethan80% of patients with plantar fasciitis. The patient is advised to reduce or discontinue activities that can exacerbate plantar fasciitis.
She expressed concerns regarding possible adverse effects of prolonged systemic therapy. In light of this, daily morning application of brimonidine 0.33% gel was added to her treatment regimen. The patient noted prompt response with significant improvement of her facial redness. Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases

Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD

A 21-year-old woman comes with her parents to discuss therapeutic options for her Crohn’s disease. She was diag-nosed with Crohn’s disease 2 years ago, and it involves her terminal ileum and proximal colon, as confirmed by colonoscopy and small bowel radiography. She was initially treated with mesalamine and budesonide with good response, but over the last 2 months, she has had a relapse of her symptoms. She is experiencing fatigue, cramping, abdominal pains, and nonbloody diarrhea up to 10 times daily, and she has had a 15-lb weight loss. She has no other significant medical or surgical his-tory. Her current medications are mesalamine 2.4 g/d and budesonide 9 mg/d. She appears thin and tired. Abdominal examination reveals tenderness without guarding in the right lower quadrant; no masses are palpable. On perianal examination, there is no tenderness, fissure, or fistula. Her laboratory data are notable for anemia and elevated C-reactive protein. What are the options for immediate con-trol of her symptoms and disease? What are the long-term management options?
Jeppesen PB et al: Teduglutide reduces need for parenteral support among patients with short bowel syndrome with intestinal failure. Gastroenterology 2012;143:1473. The immediate goals of therapy are to improve this young woman’s symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fatigue. Equally important goals are to reduce the intestinal inflammation in hopes of preventing progression to intestinal stenosis, fistulization, and need for surgery. One option now is to step up her therapy by giving her a slow, tapering course of systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone) for 8–12 weeks in order to quickly bring her symptoms and inflammation under control while also initiating therapy with an immunomodulator (eg, azathioprine or mercap-topurine) in hopes of achieving long-term disease remis-sion. If satisfactory disease control is not achieved within 3–6 months, therapy with an anti-TNF agent would then be recommended. Alternatively, patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease who have failed mesalamine may be treated upfront with both an anti-TNF agent and immu-nomodulators, which achieves higher remission rates than either agent alone and may improve long-term outcomes. Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents

Valerie B. Clinard, PharmD, & Robin L. Corelli, PharmD

Her social history is significant for alcohol use (three to four glasses of wine/night). Her vital signs include the following: temperature 99.8°F, blood pressure 132/64 mm Hg, pulse 78 bpm, and respiratory rate 15/min. On physical examination, she had left upper abdominal tenderness with evidence of hepatomegaly and mild scleral icterus. Laboratory data revealed the following: alanine aminotransferase, 527 IU/L (normal 10–35 IU/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 425 IU/L (normal < 35 IU/L); and bilirubin, 2.9 mg/dL (normal 0.1–0.3 mg/dL). What medications do OTC cold and flu preparations typically contain? Which of the OTC medications might have contrib-uted to the patient’s current symptoms? KH, a 55-year-old woman, presents to the emergency department with nausea, vomiting, and complaints of new-onset flu symptoms over the past several days. Her past medical history is significant for allergic rhinitis and chronic lower back pain secondary to a work-related fall 2 years ago.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens. For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine). Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
3. Assess:

Serum electrolytes (K+, Na+, Mg2+, Cl−, bicarbonate, phosphate)

Acid-base status—pH, HCO3−, PCO2, β-hydroxybutyrate

Renal function (creatinine, urine output) 4. Replace fluids: 2–3 L of 0.9% saline over first 1–3 h (10–20 mL/kg per hour); subsequently, 0.45% saline at 250–500 mL/h; change to 5% glucose and 0.45% saline at 150–250 mL/h when plasma glucose reaches 250 mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L). 5. Administer short-acting insulin: IV (0.1 units/kg), then 0.1 units/kg per hour by continuous IV infusion; increase twoto threefold if no response by 2–4 h. If the initial serum potassium is <3.3 mmol/L (3.3 meq/L), do not administer insulin until the potassium is corrected. 6. Assess patient: What precipitated the episode (noncompliance, infection, trauma, pregnancy, infarction, cocaine)? Initiate appropriate workup for precipitating event (cultures, CXR, ECG). 7. Measure capillary glucose every 1–2 h; measure electrolytes (especially K+, bicarbonate, phosphate) and anion gap every 4 h for first 24 h.

8. Monitor blood pressure, pulse, respirations, mental status, fluid intake and output every 1–4 h.

9. Replace K+: 10 meq/h when plasma K+ <5.0–5.2 meq/L (or 20–30 meq/L of infusion fluid), ECG normal, urine flow and normal creatinine documented; administer 40–80 meq/h when plasma K+ <3.5 meq/L or if bicarbonate is given. If initial serum potassium is >5.2 mmol/L (5.2 meq/L), do not supplement K+ until the potassium is corrected. 10. See text about bicarbonate or phosphate supplementation.
Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). M3. Electrolyte changes in tumor lysis syndrome. Treatment for AML M3. A 50-year-old man presents with early satiety, splenomegaly, and bleeding. Cytogenetics show t(9,22). Diagnosis? Heinz bodies? An autosomal-recessive disorder with a defect in the GPIIbIIIa platelet receptor and ↓ platelet aggregation. Virus associated with aplastic anemia in patients with sickle cell anemia. A 25-year-old African-American man with sickle cell anemia has sudden onset of bone pain. Management of pain crisis? A significant cause of morbidity in thalassemia patients. Treatment? ↓ Ca2+, ↑ K+, ↑ phosphate, ↑ uric acid.
In comparison to an adult who can concentrate urine to 1200 mOsm/kg, infants can concentrate urine at best to 600 mOsm/kg. While infants are capable of secreting antidiuretic hormone, ADH, the aquaporin water channel–mediated osmotic water permeability of the infant’s collecting tubules is severely limited compared to that of adults, leading to an insensitivity to ADH.Sodium requirements range from 2 mEq/kg per day in term infants up to 5 mEq/kg per day in critically ill preterm infants as a consequence of salt wasting. Potassium require-ments are on the order of 1 to 2 mEq/kg per day. Calcium and magnesium supplementation of IV fluids is essential to prevent laryngospasm, dysrhythmias, and tetany.Acid-Base EquilibriumAcute metabolic acidosis usually implies inadequate tissue perfusion and is a serious disorder in children. Potentially life-threatening causes that are specific for the pediatric population must be sought; they include intestinal ischemia from necro-tizing enterocolitis (in the neonate), midgut volvulus, or incar-cerated hernia. Other causes include chronic bicarbonate loss from the gastrointestinal tract or acid accumulation as in chronic renal failure. Respiratory acidosis implies hypoventilation, the cause of which should be apparent. Treatment of acute meta-bolic acidosis should be aimed at restoring tissue perfusion by addressing the underlying abnormality first. For severe meta-bolic acidemia where the serum pH is less than 7.25, sodium bicarbonate should be administered using the following guide-line: base deficit × weight in kilograms × 0.5 (in newborns). The last factor in the equation should be 0.4 for smaller children and 0.3 for older children. The dose should be diluted to a concentra-tion of 0.5 mEq/mL because full-strength sodium bicarbonate is hyperosmolar. One-half the corrective dose is given, and the serum pH is measured again. During cardiopulmonary resusci-tation (CPR), one-half the corrective dose can be given as an intravenous bolus and the other half given slowly intravenously.Respiratory alkalosis is usually caused by hyperventila-tion, which is readily correctable. Metabolic alkalosis most commonly implies gastric acid loss, as in the child with pyloric stenosis, or aggressive diuretic therapy. In the child with gastric fluid loss, IV fluids of 5% dextrose, 0.5% normal saline, and  20 mEq KCl/L usually correct the alkalosis.Blood Volume and Blood ReplacementCriteria for blood transfusion in infants and children remain poorly defined.
Therapy is directed first at increasing myocardial contractility, then at decreasing left ventricular afterload. The hemodynamic status of the patient dictates the choice of the agent. Therapy may be initiated with dopamine at 3 to 15 mcg/kg/min; however, epinephrine or norepinephrine may be preferable in patients with decompensated shock. In addition to improving contractility, certain catecholamines cause an increase in systemic vascular resistance. The addition of a vasodilator drug may improve cardiac performance by decreasing the resistance against which the heart must pump (afterload). Afterload reduction may be achieved with dobutamine, milrinone, amrinone, nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. The use of these drugs may be particularly important in late shock, when vasoconstriction is prominent. The lung is a target organ for inflammatory mediators inshock and SIRS. Respiratory failure may develop rapidly andbecome progressive. Intervention requires endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation accompanied by the useof supplemental oxygen and PEEP. Care must be taken withthe process of intubation, because a child with compensatedshock may suddenly decompensate on administration of sedative medications that reduce systemic vascular resistance.Severe cardiopulmonary failure may be managed with inhalednitric oxide and, if necessary, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Poor cardiac output accompanied by decreased renal blood flow may cause prerenal azotemia and oliguria/anuria. Severe hypotension may produce acute tubular necrosis and acute renal failure. Prerenal azotemia is corrected when blood volume deficits are replaced or myocardial contractility is improved, but acute tubular necrosis does not improve immediately when shock is corrected. Prerenal azotemia is associated with a serum BUN-to-creatinine ratio of greater than 10:1 and a urine sodium level less than 20 mEq/L; acute tubular necrosis has a BUN-to-creatinine ratio of 10:1 or less and a urine sodium level between 40 and 60 mEq/L (see Chapter 165).
(From Bell LM: Middle respiratory tract infections. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders, p 774.) phosphate (0.6 to 1 mg/kg) may be given once intramuscularly or dexamethasone (0.6 to 1 mg/kg) once orally. Alternatively prednisolone (2 mg/kg per day) may be given orally in two to three divided doses. For significant airway compromise, administration of aerosolized racemic (Dand L-) epinephrine reduces subglottic edema by adrenergic vasoconstriction, temporarily producing marked clinical improvement. The peak effect is within 10 to 30 minutes and fades within 60 to 90 minutes. A rebound effect may occur, with worsening of symptoms as the effect of the drug dissipates. Aerosol treatment may need to be repeated every 20 minutes (for no more than 1 to 2 hours) in severe cases. Children should be kept as calm as possible to minimize forceful inspiration. One useful calming method is for a child with croup to sit on the parent’s lap. Sedatives should be used cautiously and in the intensive care unit only. Cool mist administered by face mask may help prevent drying of the secretions around the larynx. Hospitalization is often required for children with stridor at rest. Children receiving aerosol treatment should be hospitalized or observed for at least 2 to 3 hours because of the risk of rebound airway obstruction. Decreased symptoms may indicate improvement or fatigue and impending respiratory failure.
Vulvovaginitis is the most common gynecologic problem of childhood. Prepubertally, the vulva, vestibule, and vagina are anatomically and histologically vulnerable to bacterial infection, with the bacteria typically present in the perianal area. The physical proximity of the vagina and vestibule to the anus can result in overgrowth of bacteria that can cause primary vulvitis and secondary vaginitis. Yeast infections are rare in prepubertal children who are toilet trained and out of diapers (37). Figure 14.9 A: Labial adhesions B: Cotton-tipped applicator placed inside the labial adhesions shown in (A). The clinician should be familiar with normal prepubertal genital anatomy and hymenal configuration (38,39). The unestrogenized vulvar vestibule is mildly erythematous and can be confused with infection. In addition, smegma around and beneath the prepuce may resemble patches of candida vulvitis. In prepubertal girls, the vulvar area is quite susceptible to chemical irritants. Chronic skin conditions such as lichen sclerosus, psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, and atopic vulvitis may occur in children (40). Lichen sclerosus, the cause of which is not well established, has a characteristic “cigarette paper” appearance in a keyhole distribution (around the vulva and anus) (Fig. 14.4). Lichen sclerosus should be treated in pediatric patients as it is in adults; there is some evidence that the condition may regress as the child progresses through adrenarche and menarche, although this appears to be infrequent. The use of ultrapotent steroids topically has been successful in children and adults (41). Labial agglutination or adhesions may occur as a result of chronic vulvar inﬂammation from any cause (Fig.
84. Carmina E, Oberfield SE, Lobo RA. The diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome in adolescents. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;203:201e1–e5. 85. Rosenfield RL, Lucky AW. Acne, hirsutism, and alopecia in adolescent girls. Clinical expressions of androgen excess. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1993;22:507–532. 86. Legro RS. Detection of insulin resistance and its treatment in adolescents with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2002;15(Suppl 5):1367–1378. 87. ACOG Practice Bulletin No.
Van Eyk N, Allen L, Giesbrecht E, et al. Pediatric vulvovaginal disorders: a diagnostic approach and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2009;31:850–862. 41. Garzon MC, Paller AS. Ultrapotent topical corticosteroid treatment of childhood genital lichen sclerosus. Arch Dermatol 1999;135:525– 528. 42. Muram D. Treatment of prepubertal girls with labial adhesions. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 1999;12:67–70. 43. Shapiro RA, Makoroff KL. Sexually transmitted diseases in sexually abused girls and adolescents. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2006;18:492–497. 44.
The use of ultrapotent steroids topically has been successful in children and adults (41). Labial agglutination or adhesions may occur as a result of chronic vulvar inﬂammation from any cause (Fig. 14.9A). The treatment of labial adhesions consists of a brief course (2 to 6 weeks) of externally applied estrogen cream. The area of agglutination (adhesion) will become thin as a result, and separation can usually be performed in the office with the use of a topical anesthetic (e.g., lidocaine jelly) (Fig. 14.9B). Manual separation in the office without pretreatment with topical estrogen and without anesthesia is discouraged, as this practice may be so traumatic to the child that she will not allow subsequent examination. In the absence of a previously traumatic examination or previous surgical separation with recurrence, surgical separation frequently is not required (42). Treatment with a topical emollient (such as petrolatum) is indicated after lysis to prevent recurrent adhesions. Urethral prolapse may cause acute pain or bleeding, or the presence of a mass may be noted (Fig. 14.2). Vulvovaginal symptoms of any sort in a young child should prompt the consideration of possible sexual abuse. Sexually transmitted infections may occur in prepubertal children (43). Although vulvar condyloma presenting before age 2 to 3 years can be transmitted during vaginal delivery from the mother or from warts on caretakers’ hands, the possibility of abuse should be considered in all children with genital warts (44,45). Condyloma in older girls may be spread in a nonsexual manner, but was classified as “indeterminant” in classification findings that may be associated with sexual abuse (44).
Giardia lamblia is also common and produces diarrhea, abdominal pain, and malaise.Viral Infections Herpes Simplex Virus Herpes proctitis is extremely common. Proctitis is usually caused by type 2 herpes simplex virus and less commonly by type 1 herpes simplex virus. Patients complain of severe, intractable perianal pain and tenesmus. Pain often precedes the development of characteristic vesicles, and these patients may require an examination under anesthesia to exclude another diagnosis such as an intersphincteric abscess. Diagnosis is confirmed by viral culture of tissue or vesicular fluid.Human Papillomavirus HPV causes condyloma acuminata (anogenital warts) and is associated with squamous intraepithe-lial lesions and squamous cell carcinoma (see previous section, “Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors”). Condylomas occur in the perianal area or in the squamous epithelium of the anal canal. Occasionally, the mucosa of the lower rectum may be affected. There are approximately 30 serotypes of HPV. As previously mentioned, HPV types 16 and 18, in particular, appear to pre-dispose to malignancy and often cause flat dysplasia in skin unaffected by warts. In contrast, HPV types 6 and 11 commonly cause warts, but do not appear to cause malignant degeneration.Treatment of anal condyloma depends on the location and extent of disease. Small warts on the perianal skin and distal anal canal may be treated in the office with topical application of bichloracetic acid or podophyllin. Although 60% to 80% of patients will respond to these agents, recurrence and reinfection are common. Imiquimod (Aldara) is an immunomodulator that was recently introduced for topical treatment of several viral infections, including anogenital condyloma.100 Initial reports suggest that this agent is highly effective in treating condyloma located on the perianal skin and distal anal canal. Larger and/or more numerous warts require excision and/or fulguration in the operating room. Excised warts should be sent for pathologic examination to rule out dysplasia or malignancy.
33.7 is solved for GFR:

Equation 33.8

This equation is the same form as that for clearance (see

Eq. 33.4 ). Thus measured creatinine clearance (CrCl) can be used clinically to determine GFR at steady state. Clearance has the dimensions of volume/time, and it represents an equivalent volume of plasma from which all of the substance has been removed and excreted into urine per unit time. Creatinine is not the only substance that can be used to measure GFR; any substance that meets the following criteria can serve as an appropriate marker. The substance must: 1. 2.

be freely filtered across the glomerulus into Bowman’s space 3.

not be reabsorbed or secreted by the nephron 4.

not be metabolized or produced by the kidney 5. Not all creatinine (or other substances used to measure GFR) that enters the kidney in renal arterial plasma is filtered at the glomerulus. Likewise not all plasma coming into the kidneys is filtered. Although nearly all plasma that enters the kidneys in the renal artery passes through the glomerulus, approximately 10% does not. The portion of filtered plasma is termed the filtration fraction and is determined as:

Equation 33.9

Under normal conditions the filtration fraction averages 0.15 to 0.20, which means that only 15% to 20% of the plasma that enters the glomerulus is actually filtered. The remaining 80% to 85% continues on through the glomerular capillaries and into the efferent arterioles and peritubular capillaries before finally returning to the systemic circulation via the renal vein. The first step in the formation of urine is ultrafiltration of plasma by the glomerulus. In normal adults, GFR ranges from 90 to 140 mL/min in males and from 80 to 125 mL/ min in females. Thus in 24 hours as much as 180 L of plasma is filtered by the glomeruli.
3. Assess:

Serum electrolytes (K+, Na+, Mg2+, Cl−, bicarbonate, phosphate)

Acid-base status—pH, HCO3−, PCO2, β-hydroxybutyrate

Renal function (creatinine, urine output) 4. Replace fluids: 2–3 L of 0.9% saline over first 1–3 h (10–20 mL/kg per hour); subsequently, 0.45% saline at 250–500 mL/h; change to 5% glucose and 0.45% saline at 150–250 mL/h when plasma glucose reaches 250 mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L). 5. Administer short-acting insulin: IV (0.1 units/kg), then 0.1 units/kg per hour by continuous IV infusion; increase twoto threefold if no response by 2–4 h. If the initial serum potassium is <3.3 mmol/L (3.3 meq/L), do not administer insulin until the potassium is corrected. 6. Assess patient: What precipitated the episode (noncompliance, infection, trauma, pregnancy, infarction, cocaine)? Initiate appropriate workup for precipitating event (cultures, CXR, ECG). 7. Measure capillary glucose every 1–2 h; measure electrolytes (especially K+, bicarbonate, phosphate) and anion gap every 4 h for first 24 h.

8. Monitor blood pressure, pulse, respirations, mental status, fluid intake and output every 1–4 h.

9. Replace K+: 10 meq/h when plasma K+ <5.0–5.2 meq/L (or 20–30 meq/L of infusion fluid), ECG normal, urine flow and normal creatinine documented; administer 40–80 meq/h when plasma K+ <3.5 meq/L or if bicarbonate is given. If initial serum potassium is >5.2 mmol/L (5.2 meq/L), do not supplement K+ until the potassium is corrected. 10. See text about bicarbonate or phosphate supplementation.
This correction is important because of the relatively small volumes of distribution of these water-soluble drugs. B. Clearance

Drugs cleared by the renal route often require adjustment of clearance in proportion to renal function. This can be conveniently estimated from the creatinine clearance, calculated from a single serum creatinine measurement and the predicted creatinine production rate. The predicted creatinine production rate in women is 85% of the calculated value because they have a smaller muscle mass per kilogram, and it is muscle mass that determines creatinine production. Muscle mass as a fraction of body weight decreases with age, which is why age appears in the Cockcroft-Gault equation. *

The decrease of renal function with age is independent of the decrease in creatinine production. Because of the difficulty of obtaining complete urine collections, creatinine clearance calculated in this way is at least as reliable as estimates based on urine collections. The fat-free mass (equation [14]) should be considered rather than total body weight for obese patients, and correction should be made for muscle wasting in severely ill patients. Revising Individual Estimates of Volume of Distribution & Clearance

The commonsense approach to the interpretation of drug concentrations compares predictions of pharmacokinetic parameters and expected concentrations to measured values. If measured concentrations differ by more than 20% from predicted values, revised estimates of V or CL for that patient should be calculated using equation (1) or equation (2). If the change calculated is more than a 100% increase or 50% decrease in either V or CL, the assumptions made about the timing of the sample and the dosing history should be critically examined. For example, if a patient is taking 0.25 mg of digoxin a day, a clinician may expect the digoxin concentration to be about 1 ng/ mL. This is based on typical values for bioavailability of 70% and total clearance of about 7 L/h (CLrenal 4 L/h, CLnonrenal 3 L/h). If the patient has heart failure, the nonrenal (hepatic) clearance might be halved because of hepatic congestion and hypoxia, so the expected clearance would become 5.5 L/h.
In normal adults, GFR ranges from 90 to 140 mL/min in males and from 80 to 125 mL/ min in females. Thus in 24 hours as much as 180 L of plasma is filtered by the glomeruli. The plasma ultrafiltrate is devoid of cellular elements (i.e., red and white blood cells and

Creatinine clearance (CrCl) is used to estimate GFR in clinical practice. It is synthesized at a relatively constant rate, and the amount produced is proportional to the total muscle mass. However, creatinine is not a perfect substance for measuring GFR because it is secreted to a small extent by the organic cation secretory system in the proximal tubule (see ). The error introduced by this secretory component is approximately 10%. Thus the amount of creatinine excreted in urine exceeds the amount expected from filtration alone by 10%. However, the method used to measure the plasma creatinine concentration (PCr) overestimates the true value by 10%. Consequently the two errors cancel each other, and in most clinical situations, CrCl provides a reasonably accurate measure of GFR. A fall in GFR may be the first and only clinical sign of kidney disease. Thus measuring GFR is important when kidney disease is suspected. A 50% loss of functioning nephrons reduces GFR only by about 25%. The decline in GFR is not 50% because the remaining nephrons compensate. Because measurements of GFR are cumbersome, kidney function is usually assessed in the clinical setting by measuring the plasma concentration of creatinine (PCr),which is inversely related to GFR (

Fig. 33.14 ).
The gastrointestinal tract is potentially a source of considerable water and electrolyte losses. A child who has large amounts of gastrointestinal losses should have these losses measured and replaced with an appropriate replacement solution (Table 33-3). Urine output is normally the largest cause of water loss. Diseases such as renal failure and the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) can lead to a decrease in urine volume. Maintenance fluids in a patient with oliguria or anuria produce fluid overload. In contrast, other conditions produce an increase in urine volume; these include the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis, diabetes mellitus, and diabetes insipidus. When the urine output is excessive, the patient must receive more than standard maintenance fluids to prevent dehydration. The approach to decreased or increased urine output is similar (Table 33-4). Insensible losses are replaced by a solution that is administered at a rate one third of the normal maintenance rate. Placing the anuric child on “insensibles” theoretically maintains an even fluid balance, with the caveat that one third of maintenance fluid is only an estimate of insensible losses. This rate may need to be adjusted based on monitoring of the patient’s weight and hydration status. An oliguric child needs to receive a urine replacement solution. Most children with polyuria (except for children with diabetes mellitus [see Chapter 171]) should be placed on insensible fluids plus urine replacement. Sodium: 55 mEq/L Solution: 5% dextrose in ¼ normal saline + 20 mEq/L sodium bicarbonate + 20 mEq/L potassium chloride Replace stool mL/mL every 1–6 hr

Potassium: 25 mEq/L

Bicarbonate: 15 mEq/L

Sodium: 60 mEq/L Solution: normal saline + 10 mEq/L potassium chloride Replace output mL/mL every 1–6 hr

Potassium: 10 mEq/L

Chloride: 90 mEq/L

Place the patient on insensible Place the patient on insensible fluids (⅓ maintenance) fluids (⅓ maintenance)

Replace urine output mL/mL Measure urine electrolytes with half normal saline

Replace urine output mL/mL with a solution that is based on the measured urine electrolytes

Output from surgical drains and chest tubes, when significant, should be measured and replaced. Third space lossesmanifest with edema and ascites and are due to a shift of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitial space.
This transient condition is also termed gestational transient thyrotoxicosis. Even if associated with hyperemesis, antithyroid drugs are not warranted (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). The degree of hCG level elevation does not correlate with thyroxine and TSH values, which become more normal by midpregnancy (Nathan, 2014; Yoshihara, 2015). he prevalence of increased thyroxine levels in women with a molar pregnancy ranges between 25 and 65 percent (Hershman, 2004). As discussed, abnormally high hCG levels lead to overstimulation of the TSH receptor. Because these tumors are now usually diagnosed early, clinically apparent hyperthyroidism has become less common. With molar evacuation, serum free T4 levels usually normalize rapidly in parallel with declining hCG concentrations. This is discussed further in Chapter 20 (p. 391). hird-generation TSH assays with an analytical sensitivity of 0.002 mU/mL permit identiication of subclinical thyroid disorders. These biochemically defined extremes usually represent normal biological variations but may herald the earliest stages of thyroid dysfunction. Subclinical hyperthyroidism is characterized by an abnormally low serum TSH concentration in concert with normal thyroxine hormone levels (Surks, 2004). Long-term efects of persistent subclinical thyrotoxicosis include osteoporosis, cardiovascular morbidity, and progression

After 1-2 hours of thionamide therapy start iodine: if iodine anaphylaxis history, Lithium carbonate 300 mg PO every 6 hr

Consider corticosteroid therapy for 24 hours:

FIGURE 58-4 One management method for thyroid storm or thyrotoxic heart failure. gtt = drops; IV = intravenous; NGT = nasogastric tube; PO = orally; PTU = propylthiouracil. to overt thyrotoxicosis or thyroid failure. Casey and Leveno (2006) reported that subclinical hyperthyroidism was found in 1.7 percent of pregnant women.
Autonomously functioning benign thyroid neoplasias are less common causes of hyperthyroidism and are associated with toxic adenomas and toxic multinodular goiter. Transient thyrotoxicosis may be the result of unregulated glandular release of thyroid hormone in postpartum (painless, silent, or lymphocytic) thyroiditis and subacute (painful) thyroiditis. Other rare causes of thyroid overactivity include human chorionic gonadotropin–secreting choriocarcinoma, TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma, and struma ovarii. Factitious ingestion or iatrogenic overprescribing should be considered in patients with eating disorders. Clinical Features Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis include fatigue, diarrhea, heat intolerance, palpitations, dyspnea, nervousness, and weight loss. In young patients there may be paradoxical weight gain from an increased appetite. Thyrotoxicosis may cause vomiting in pregnant women, which may be confused with hyperemesis gravidarum (50). Tachycardia, lid lag, tremor, proximal muscle weakness, and warm moist skin are classic physical findings. The most dramatic physical changes are ophthalmologic and include lid retraction, periorbital edema, and proptosis. These eye findings occur in less than one-third of women. In elderly adults, symptoms are often more subtle, with presentations of unexplained weight loss, atrial fibrillation, or new onset angina pectoris. Menstrual abnormalities span from regular menses to light ﬂow to anovulatory menses and associated infertility. Goiter is common in younger women with Graves disease, but may be absent in older women. Toxic nodular goiter is associated with nonhomogeneous glandular enlargement, whereas in subacute thyroiditis the gland is tender, hard, and enlarged. Diagnosis Most thyrotoxic patients have elevated total and free T4 and T3 concentrations (measured by radioimmune assay).
cal indings that include fatigue, constipation, cold intolerance, (Includes those treated before pregnancy. muscle cramps, and weight gain. A pathologically enlarged thy dDiagnosed in early versus later pregnancy. roid gland depends on the etiology of hypothyroidism and is hypothyroidism, discussed later, is defined by an elevated serum TSH level and normal serum thyroxine concentration Qameson, 2015). Sometimes included in the spectrum of subclinical thyroid disease are asymptomatic individuals with high levels of anti-TPO or anti thyroglobulin antibodies. Autoimmune euthyroid disease represents a new investigative frontier in screening and treatment of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy. he most common cause of hypothyroidism in pregnancy is Hashimoto thyroiditis, characterized by glandular destruction from autoantibodies, particularly anti-TPO antibodies. Another cause is postablative Graves disease. Clinical identiication of hypothyroidism is especially diicult during pregnancy because many of the signs or symptoms are also common to pregnancy itself. Thyroid analyte testing should be performed on symptomatic women or those with a history of thyroid disease (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). Severe hypothyroidism during pregnancy is uncommon, probably because it is often associated with infertility and higher spontaneous abortion rates (De Groot, 2012). Even women with treated hypothyroidism undergoing in vitro fertilization have a significantly lower chance of achieving pregnancy (Scoccia,r2012). Treatment. The American hyroid Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (2011) recommend replacement therapy for overt hypothyroidism beginning with levothyroxine in doses of 1 to 2 ILg/kgl d or approximately 100 Lg daily. Women who are athyreotic after thyroidectomy or radioiodine therapy may require higher doses.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Women with thyrotoxicosis have pregnancy outcomes that largely depend on whether metabolic control is achieved. For example, excess thyroxine may cause miscarriage or preterm birth (Andersen, 2014; Sheehan, 2015). In untreated women or in those who remain hyperthyroid despite therapy, incidences of preeclampsia, heart failure, and adverse perinatal outcomes are higher (Table 58-2). A prospective cohort study from China showed that women with clinical hyperthyroidism had a 12-fold greater risk of delivering an infant with hearing loss (Su, 2011). In most cases, the perinate is euthyroid. In some, however, hyper-or hypothyroidism can develop with or without a goiter (Fig. 58-3). Clinical hyperthyroidism develops in up to 1 percent of neonates born to women with Graves disease (Barbesino, 2013; Fitzpatrick, 2010). If fetal thyroid disease is

TABLE 58-2. Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with Overt Thyrotoxicosis aData presented as n (%). Data from Davis, 1989; Kriplani, 1994; Luewan, 201n1; Medici, 2014; Millar, 1994. FIGURE 58-3 Term hypothyroid neonate delivered of a woman with a 3-year history of thyrotoxicosis that recurred at 26 weeks' gestation. The mother was given methimazole 30 mg orally daily and was euthyroid at delivery. suspected, nomograms are available for sonographically mea sured thyroid volume (Gietka-Czernel, 2012). The fetus or neonate who was exposed to excessive maternal thyroxine may have any of several clinical presentations.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Premenopausal women have cycling FSH levels, also preventing clear-cut diagnostic distinction from tumor-derived FSH. In men, gonadotropin-secreting tumors may be diagnosed because of slightly increased gonadotropins (FSH > LH) in the setting of a pituitary mass. Testosterone levels are usually low despite the normal or increased LH level, perhaps reflecting reduced LH bioactivity or the loss of normal LH pulsatility. Because this pattern of hormone test results is also seen in primary gonadal failure and, to some extent, with aging (Chap. 411), the finding of increased gonadotropins alone is insufficient for the diagnosis of a gonadotropin-secreting tumor. In the majority of patients with gonadotrope adenomas, TRH administration stimulates LH β subunit secretion; this response is not seen in normal individuals. GnRH testing, however, is not helpful for making the diagnosis. For nonfunctioning and gonadotropinsecreting tumors, the diagnosis usually rests on immunohistochemical analyses of surgically resected tumor tissue, as the mass effects of these tumors usually necessitate resection. Although acromegaly or Cushing’s syndrome usually presents with unique clinical features, clinically inapparent (silent) somatotrope or corticotrope adenomas may only be diagnosed by immunostaining of resected tumor tissue. If PRL levels are <100 μg/L in a patient harboring a pituitary mass, a nonfunctioning adenoma causing pituitary stalk compression should be considered. Asymptomatic small nonfunctioning microadenomas adenomas with no threat to vision may be followed with regular MRI and visual field testing without immediate intervention. However, for macroadenomas, transsphenoidal surgery is indicated to reduce tumor size and relieve mass effects (Fig. 403-7). Although it is not usually

FIGURE 403-7 Management of a nonfunctioning pituitary mass. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Although it is not usually

FIGURE 403-7 Management of a nonfunctioning pituitary mass. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. possible to remove all adenoma tissue surgically, vision improves in 70% of patients with preoperative visual field defects. Preexisting hypopituitarism that results from tumor mass effects may improve or resolve completely. Beginning about 6 months postoperatively, MRI scans should be performed yearly to detect tumor regrowth. Within 5–6 years after successful surgical resection, ~15% of non-functioning tumors recur. When substantial tumor remains after transsphenoidal surgery, adjuvant radiotherapy may be indicated to prevent tumor regrowth. Radiotherapy may be deferred if no postoperative residual mass is evident. Nonfunctioning pituitary tumors respond poorly to dopamine agonist treatment and somatostatin analogues are largely ineffective for shrinking these tumors. The selective GnRH antagonist Nal-Glu GnRH suppresses FSH hypersecretion but has no effect on adenoma size. TSH-producing macroadenomas are very rare but are often large and locally invasive when they occur. Patients usually present with thyroid goiter and hyperthyroidism, reflecting overproduction of TSH. Diagnosis is based on demonstrating elevated serum free T4 levels, inappropriately normal or high TSH secretion, and MRI evidence of a pituitary adenoma. Elevated uncombined α subunits are seen in many patients. It is important to exclude other causes of inappropriate TSH secretion, such as resistance to thyroid hormone, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone β receptor (Chap.
Occasionally, ultrastructural assessment by electron microscopy is required for diagnosis. TREATmEnT HypotHalamic, pituitary, anD otHer sellar masses

OVERVIEW Successful management of sellar masses requires accurate diagnosis as well as selection of optimal therapeutic modalities. Most pituitary tumors are benign and slow-growing. Clinical features result from local mass effects and hormonal hyperor hyposecretion syndromes caused directly by the adenoma or occurring as a consequence of treatment. Thus, lifelong management and follow-up are necessary for these patients. MRI with gadolinium enhancement for pituitary visualization, new advances in transsphenoidal surgery and in stereotactic radiotherapy (including gamma-knife radiotherapy), and novel therapeutic agents have improved pituitary tumor management. The goals of pituitary tumor treatment include normalization of excess pituitary secretion, amelioration of symptoms and signs of hormonal hypersecretion syndromes, and shrinkage or ablation of large tumor masses with relief of adjacent structure compression. Residual anterior pituitary function should be preserved during treatment and sometimes can be restored by removing the tumor mass. Ideally, adenoma recurrence should be prevented. TRANSSPHENOIDAL SURGERY Transsphenoidal rather than transfrontal resection is the desired surgical approach for pituitary tumors, except for the rare invasive suprasellar mass surrounding the frontal or middle fossa or the optic nerves or invading posteriorly behind the clivus. Intraoperative microscopy facilitates visual distinction between adenomatous and normal pituitary tissue as well as microdissection of small tumors that may not be visible by MRI (Fig. 403-2). Transsphenoidal surgery also avoids the cranial invasion and manipulation of brain tissue required by subfrontal surgical approaches. Endoscopic techniques with three-dimensional nerve of cavernous

FIGURE 403-2 Transsphenoidal resection of pituitary mass via the endonasal approach. (Adapted from R Fahlbusch: Endocrinol Metab Clin 21:669, 1992.)
Bitemporal hemianopia may result from compression of the optic chiasm by a pituitary adenoma. Excess GH may also lead to glucose intolerance or diabetes. Imaging: MRI of the pituitary shows a sellar lesion. Labs: Screen by measuring insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels (↑with acromegaly); confirm the diagnosis with an oral glucose suppression test (GH levels will remain elevated despite glucose suppression; baseline GH is not a reliable test). Transsphenoidal surgical resection or external beam radiation of the tumor. Octreotide can be used to suppress GH secretion. Pegvisomant can be used to block GH receptors in refractory cases. Prolactinoma is the most common functioning pituitary tumor. Other pathologic causes include craniopharyngioma, irradiation, drugs (e.g., dopamine), and cirrhosis. Hx/PE: Hypogonadism is manifested by infertility, oligomenorrhea, or amenorrhea. Galactorrhea, gynecomastia, or bitemporal hemianopia may be prominent. Dx: The serum prolactin level is typically > 200 mg/mL. Tx:

Dopamine agonists (f rst-line therapy): Cabergoline or bromocriptine. Surgery: Should be considered when medical treatment has failed, when the patient desires future pregnancies, or in the setting of visual field defects. Failure to concentrate urine as a result of central or nephrogenic ADH dysfunction.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Review of systems was negative for fever, orthostatic dizziness, nausea and vomiting, or headache. Past medical history included hypertension, kidney stones, and hypercholesterolemia; medications included atenolol, spironolactone, and lovastatin. She also reliably consumed >2 L of liquid per day in management of the nephrolithiasis. The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly. The plasma Na+ concentration on admission was 113 meq/L, with a creatinine of 2.35 (Table 64e-1). At hospital hour 7, the plasma Na+ concentration was 120 meq/L, potassium 5.4 meq/L, chloride 90 64e-5 meq/L, bicarbonate 22 meq/L, BUN 32 mg/dL, creatinine 2.02 mg/dL, glucose 89 mg/dL, total protein 5.0, and albumin 1.9. The hematocrit was 33.9, white count 7.6, and platelets 405. A morning cortisol was 19.5, with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.7. The patient was treated with 1 μg of intravenous DDAVP, along with 75 mL/h of intravenous half-normal saline. After the plasma Na+ concentration dropped to 116 meq/L, intravenous fluid was switched to normal saline at the same infusion rate. The subsequent results are shown in Table 64e-1. This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
History of atopy is an important aspect of this evaluation in that it may predispose patients to form antibodies against antigens that may be represented by agents administered during the perioperative period. Concurrent medications should be fully evaluated when circumstances allow, and adverse inter-actions with agents administered during the perioperative period need to be considered. A review of the function of major organ systems should also be performed. The physical examination is targeted primarily at the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, lungs, and airway.Laboratory testing should be based on the patient’s con-dition and the proposed procedure. Otherwise healthy patients usually do not need laboratory testing for minor procedures. Preoperative testing may be necessitated by findings on physi-cal examination; for example, an electrocardiogram should be obtained if an irregular heart rhythm is noted, and an echo-cardiogram may be indicated if a new murmur is observed on Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203301/03/19   11:04 AM 2034SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIauscultation. Chest imaging or pulmonary function testing may be indicated if abnormalities are noted on pulmonary examina-tion and may be pertinent to the administration of the anesthetic or the recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Urine pregnancy testing is typically performed on the day of surgery in women of childbearing age.ASA Physical Status AssessmentThe ASA classification system is a scale used to risk-stratify patients for anesthesia and surgery. The scale, ranging from physical status I to VI, is shown in Table 46-5. Patients under-going emergent surgery are denoted by an “E”; for example, an otherwise healthy patient undergoing an appendectomy for appendicitis would be classified as ASA IE. Mortality has shown to increase with increasing ASA physical status, and it has been shown to be higher for patients undergoing emergency surgery.27Airway EvaluationAirway examination can identify most patients in whom management of the airway and conventional endotracheal CLASS 1: Soft palate, fauces, uvula, pillarsCLASS 2: Soft palate, fauces, portion of uvulaCLASS 3: Soft palate, base of uvulaCLASS 4: Hard palate onlyMALLAMPATI CLASSIFICATIONCLASS 1CLASS 2CLASS 3CLASS 4Figure 46-3. The Mallampati classification.Table 46-5American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classificationASA PHYSICAL STATUSDESCRIPTIONIA healthy patient without systemic diseaseIIA patient with mild systemic diseaseIIIA patient with severe systemic diseaseIVA patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to lifeVA moribund patient not expected to survive without the operationVIA declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donationData from American Society of Anesthesiologists: ASA Physical Status Classification System Developed. ASA House of Delegates/Executive Committee. Amended: October 15, 2014.intubation may be difficult. It is vitally important to recognize such patients before administering medications that induce apnea.
These are compared to predicted values based on patient age, gender, and race, but rely mostly on height. Most children above 6 years of age can perform spirometry. Infant pulmonary function testing is possible, using sedation and sophisticated equipment. Airway resistance, FRC, and RV cannot be measured with spirometry and require other techniques, such as body plethysmography. Helium dilution can also measure TLC and RV by determining the magnitude of dilution of inhaled helium in the air within the lung, but may underestimate air trapping. Abnormal results on pulmonary function testing can beused to categorize obstructive airway disease (low flow rates and increased RV or FRC) or a restrictive defect (low FVCand TLC, with relative preservation of flow rates and FRC).When the FEV1 and flow rates are decreased to a greaterextent than the FVC, then airway obstruction is likely; however, a proportional decrease in FVC, FEV1, and flow rates suggests a restrictive lung defect. The mean midexpiratoryflow rate (FEF25–75%) is a more sensitive measure of small airways disease than the FEV1, but is also more variable. Pulmonary function testing can detect reversible airway obstruction characteristic of asthma with a significant improvementin FEV1 (>12%-15%) or in FEF25–75% (>25%) followinginhalation of a bronchodilator. Spirometry is also useful forlongitudinal patient management. The peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) can be obtained with a simple handheld deviceand may be useful for home monitoring of older childrenwith asthma. However, it is highly dependent on patienteffort, and values must be interpreted with caution. Inhalation challenge tests using methacholine, histamine, or cold, dry air are used to assess airway hyperreactivity, but require sophisticated equipment and special expertise and should be performed only in a pulmonary function laboratory with experienced technicians. Endoscopic Evaluation of the Airways

Endoscopic evaluation of the upper airways (nasopharyngoscopy) is performed with a flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngoscope to assess adenoid size, patency of the nasal passages, and abnormalities of the glottis. It is especially useful in evaluating stridor and assessing vocal cord motion/function, and it does not require sedation. Endoscopic evaluation of the subglottic space and intrathoracic airways can be done with either a flexible or rigid bronchoscope under anesthesia.
The diagnostic test for pulmonary embolism. An agent that reverses the effects of heparin. The coagulation parameter affected by warfarin. A young patient with a family history of sudden death collapses and dies while exercising. Endocarditis prophylaxis regimens. The 6 P’s of ischemia due to peripheral vascular disease. Virchow’s triad. The most common cause of hypertension in young women. The most common cause of hypertension in young men. Abdominal ultrasound and CT.

> 5.5 cm, rapidly enlarging, symptomatic, or ruptured. Morphine, O2, sublingual nitroglycerin, ASA, IV β-blockers, heparin. Abdominal obesity, high triglycerides, low HDL, hypertension, insulin resistance, prothrombotic or proinﬂ ammatory states. Exercise stress treadmill with ECG. Pharmacologic stress test (e.g., dobutamine echo). < 70.
The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap. 24). Petechial rashes are typically seen with meningococcemia or Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF; see Fig. 25e-16); erythroderma is associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS) and drug fever. The soft tissue and muscle examination is critical. Areas of erythema or duskiness, edema, and tenderness may indicate underlying necrotizing fasciitis, myositis, or myonecrosis. The neurologic examination must include a careful assessment of mental status for signs of early encephalopathy. Evidence of nuchal rigidity or focal neurologic findings should be sought. DIAGNOSTIC WORKUP After a quick clinical assessment, diagnostic material should be obtained rapidly and antibiotic and supportive treatment begun. Blood (for cultures; baseline complete blood count with differential; measurement of serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and serum glucose; and liver function tests) can be obtained at the time an IV line is placed and before antibiotics are administered. The blood lactate concentration also should be measured. Three sets of blood cultures should be performed for patients with possible acute endocarditis. Asplenic patients should have a buffy coat examined for bacteria; these patients can have >106 organisms per milliliter of blood (compared with 104/mL in patients with an intact spleen). Blood smears from patients at risk for severe parasitic disease, such as malaria or babesiosis (Chap.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Huisman EL et al: Comparative efficacy of combination bronchodilator therapies in COPD: A network meta-analysis. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2015;10:1863. Kew KM, Dias S, Cates CJ: Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for COPD: A network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;1:CD010844. Niewoehner DE: Clinical practice. Outpatient management of severe COPD. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1407. Vogelmeier C et al: Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerbations of COPD. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1093. This patient demonstrates the destabilizing effects of a respiratory infection on asthma, and her mother’s comments demonstrate the common (and dangerous) phobia about “overuse” of bronchodilator or steroid inhalers. The patient has signs of imminent respiratory failure, including her refusal to lie down, her fear, and her tachycardia, which can-not be attributed to her minimal treatment with albuterol. Critically important immediate steps are to administer high-flow oxygen and to start albuterol by nebulization. Adding ipratropium (Atrovent) to the nebulized solution is recom-mended. A corticosteroid (0.5–1.0 mg/kg of methylpred-nisolone) should be administered intravenously. It is also advisable to alert the intensive care unit, because a patient with severe bronchospasm who tires can slip into respiratory failure quickly, and intubation can be difficult.
Their cases were progressive and eventually involved the limbs. In the few well-studied cases of this type, the brunt of the pathologic process has fallen on the cervical portion of the spinal cord. Widespread loss of internuncial neurons with relative sparing of the anterior horn cells, reactive gliosis and microglial proliferation, conspicuous lymphocytic cuffing of small blood vessels, and scanty meningeal inflammation have been the main findings. Involvement of the white matter is less marked. The pathophysiology of the rigidity in these cases is presumed to be because of the impaired function (or destruction) of Renshaw cells, with the release of tonic reflexes (Penry et al). The painful spasms and dysesthesias relate in some way to neuronal lesions in the posterior horns of the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia. Whitely and Lhermitte and their coworkers proposed that these cases probably represent an obscure form of viral myelitis. The cases we have observed have been of the type that remained confined to several contiguous spinal segments, usually the upper abdomen and lower thorax as described by Brown and colleagues. Some patients report a premonitory sensation before the abdominal jerking, or there is worsening with the supine position. Whether these represent the same disease as the one noted above is unclear but the segmental, abdominal variety is now a firmly established entity, albeit also idiopathic, as described in a series by Roze et al and discussed under “Spinal or Segmental Myoclonus” in Chap. 4. The CSF may be normal or show a mild lymphocytosis and increase in protein content. Myoclonic jerking of the trunk and limbs in a focal or segmental distribution is probably a result of neuronal damage of this same type that is limited to a few segments of the spinal cord. Clonazepan, various antiepileptic and antispasticity drugs in combination may partially suppress the myoclonus, and local injection of botulinum toxin has improved the symptoms in some. A similar syndrome in a few cases has followed vertebral or spinal artery angiography (see later).
Whitely AM, Swash M, Urich H: Progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity. Brain 99:27, 1976. Wilkinson M: Cervical Spondylosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,

Saunders, 1971. Wilkinson PA, Valentine A, Gibbs JM: Intrinsic spinal cord lesions complicating epidural anaesthesia and analgesia: Report of three cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 72:537, 2002. Willeit J, Kiechl S, Kiechl-Kohlendarfer U, et al: Juvenile asymmetric segmental spinal muscular atrophy (Hirayama’s disease): Three cases without evidence of “flexion myelopathy.” Acta Neurol Scand 104:320, 2001. Williams B: The cystic spinal cord. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 58:649, 1995. Williams CS, Butler E, Roman GC: Treatment of myelopathy in Sjögren syndrome with a combination of prednisone and cyclophosphamide. Arch Neurol 59:815, 2001. Winkelman MD: Neurological complications of thermal and electrical burns. In: Aminoff MJ (ed): Neurology and General

Medicine. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1994, pp 915–929. Winkelman MD, Adelstein DJ, Karlins NL: Intramedullary spinal cord metastases: Diagnostic and therapeutic considerations.
Blocks actions of adenosine. Muscarinic Chromones Cromolyn—prevents mast cell degranulation. antagonists Prevents acute asthma symptoms. Rarely used. Anti-IL-5 monoclonal Prevents eosinophil differentiation, maturation, therapy activation, and survival mediated by IL-5 Early response: Late response: stimulation. For maintenance therapy in severe eosinophilic asthma. Mepolizumab, reslizumab—against IL-5. Benralizumab—against IL-5 receptor α. “Study without thought is vain: thought without study is dangerous.” “It is better, of course, to know useless things than to know nothing.” “For every complex problem there is an answer that is clear, simple, and wrong.” —H. L. Mencken

The following tables represent a collection of high-yield associations between diseases and their clinical findings, treatments, and key associations. They can be quickly reviewed in the days before the exam. Gout, intellectual disability, self-mutilating behavior in a Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (HGPRT deficiency, X-linked 37 boy recessive)

Arachnodactyly, lens dislocation (upward and temporal), Marfan syndrome (fibrillin defect) 52 aortic dissection, hyperflexible joints

Calf pseudohypertrophy Muscular dystrophy (most commonly Duchenne, due to 61 X-linked recessive frameshift mutation of dystrophin gene)

Child uses arms to stand up from squat Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Gowers sign) 61

Slow, progressive muscle weakness in boys Becker muscular dystrophy (X-linked non-frameshift 61 deletions in dystrophin; less severe than Duchenne)

Infant with cleft lip/palate, microcephaly or Patau syndrome (trisomy 13) 63 holoprosencephaly, polydactyly, cutis aplasia

Infant with microcephaly, rocker-bottom feet, clenched Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) 63 hands, and structural heart defect

Dilated cardiomyopathy, edema, alcoholism or Wet beriberi (thiamine [vitamin B1] deficiency) 66 malnutrition

Dermatitis, dementia, diarrhea Pellagra (niacin [vitamin B3] deficiency) 67

Swollen gums, mucosal bleeding, poor wound healing, Scurvy (vitamin C deficiency: can’t hydroxylate proline/ 69 petechiae lysine for collagen synthesis)

Chronic exercise intolerance with myalgia, fatigue, McArdle disease (skeletal muscle glycogen phosphorylase 87 painful cramps, myoglobinuria deficiency)

Infant with hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly Cori disease (debranching enzyme deficiency) or Von 87 Gierke disease (glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency, more severe)

Myopathy (infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), Pompe disease (lysosomal α-1,4-glucosidase deficiency) 88 (sphingomyelin accumulation), central retinal artery occlusion

Hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, osteoporosis, Gaucher disease (glucocerebrosidase [β-glucosidase] avascular necrosis of femoral head, bone crises deficiency)

Male child, recurrent infections, no mature B cells Bruton disease (X-linked agammaglobulinemia)

Recurrent cold (noninflamed) abscesses, eczema, high Hyper-IgE syndrome (Job syndrome: neutrophil 116 serum IgE,  eosinophils chemotaxis abnormality) “Strawberry tongue” Scarlet fever 136, Kawasaki disease 314

Abdominal pain, diarrhea, leukocytosis, recent antibiotic Clostridium difficile infection

Back pain, fever, night sweats Pott disease (vertebral TB)

Adrenal hemorrhage, hypotension, DIC Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (meningococcemia) 142, 349

Large rash with bull’s-eye appearance Erythema migrans from Ixodes tick bite (Lyme disease: 146 Borrelia)

Ulcerated genital lesion Nonpainful, indurated: chancre (1° syphilis, Treponema 147, pallidum) 184 Painful, with exudate: chancroid (Haemophilus ducreyi)

Smooth, moist, painless, wart-like white lesions on Condylomata lata (2° syphilis) 147 genitals

Fever, chills, headache, myalgia following antibiotic Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (rapid lysis of spirochetes 148 treatment for syphilis results in endotoxin-like release)

Dog or cat bite resulting in infection Pasteurella multocida (cellulitis at inoculation site) 149 Rash on palms and soles Coxsackie A, 2° syphilis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever 150 Black eschar on face of patient with diabetic ketoacidosis Mucor or Rhizopus fungal infection 153

Chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, intracranial calcifications Congenital toxoplasmosis 156

Child with fever later develops red rash on face that Erythema infectiosum/fifth disease (“slapped cheeks” 164 spreads to body appearance, caused by parvovirus B19)

Fever, cough, conjunctivitis, coryza, diffuse rash Measles 170

Small, irregular red spots on buccal/lingual mucosa with Koplik spots (measles [rubeola] virus) 170 blue-white centers

Bounding pulses, wide pulse pressure, diastolic heart Aortic regurgitation 291 murmur, head bobbing

Continuous “machine-like” heart murmur PDA (close with indomethacin; keep open with PGE

Chest pain on exertion Angina (stable: with moderate exertion; unstable: with 304 Chest pain, pericardial effusion/friction rub, persistent Dressler syndrome (autoimmune-mediated post-MI

Chest pain with ST depressions on ECG Angina (⊝ troponins) or NSTEMI (⊕ troponins) 307 fever following MI fibrinous pericarditis, 2 weeks to several months after acute episode)

Painful, raised red lesions on pads of fingers/toes Osler nodes (infective endocarditis, immune complex

Painless erythematous lesions on palms and soles Janeway lesions (infective endocarditis, septic emboli/ 311 microabscesses)

Retinal hemorrhages with pale centers Roth spots (bacterial endocarditis)

Distant heart sounds, distended neck veins, hypotension Beck triad of cardiac tamponade

Cervical lymphadenopathy, desquamating rash, coronary Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, 314 aneurysms, red conjunctivae and tongue, hand-foot treat with IVIG and aspirin) changes

Palpable purpura on buttocks/legs, joint pain, abdominal Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein 315 pain (child), hematuria purpura, affects skin and kidneys)

Telangiectasias, recurrent epistaxis, skin discoloration, Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Weber-316 arteriovenous malformations, GI bleeding, hematuria Rendu syndrome)

Skin hyperpigmentation, hypotension, fatigue 1° adrenocortical insufficiency  ACTH, • α-MSH (eg, 349 Addison disease)

Cutaneous flushing, diarrhea, bronchospasm Carcinoid syndrome (right-sided cardiac valvular lesions, 352 • 5-HIAA)

Cold intolerance, weight gain, brittle hair Hypothyroidism 341

Cutaneous/dermal edema due to deposition of Myxedema (caused by hypothyroidism, Graves disease 340 mucopolysaccharides in connective tissue [pretibial])

No lactation postpartum, absent menstruation, cold Sheehan syndrome (postpartum hemorrhage leading to 339 intolerance pituitary infarction)

Deep, labored breathing/hyperventilation Diabetic ketoacidosis (Kussmaul respirations) 347 Pancreatic, pituitary, parathyroid tumors MEN 1 (autosomal dominant) 351

Thyroid tumors, pheochromocytoma, MEN 2B (autosomal dominant RET mutation) 351 ganglioneuromatosis, Marfanoid habitus

Thyroid and parathyroid tumors, pheochromocytoma MEN 2A (autosomal dominant RET mutation) 351 Jaundice, palpable distended non-tender gallbladder Courvoisier sign (distal malignant obstruction of biliary 398 tree)

Vomiting blood following gastroesophageal lacerations Mallory-Weiss syndrome (alcoholic and bulimic patients) 377 Dysphagia (esophageal webs), glossitis, iron deficiency Plummer-Vinson syndrome (may progress to esophageal 377 anemia squamous cell carcinoma)

Enlarged, hard left supraclavicular node Virchow node (abdominal metastasis) 379

Arthralgias, adenopathy, cardiac and neurological Whipple disease (Tropheryma whipplei) symptoms, diarrhea

Severe RLQ pain with palpation of LLQ Rovsing sign (acute appendicitis)

Severe RLQ pain with deep tenderness McBurney sign (acute appendicitis)

Hamartomatous GI polyps, hyperpigmented macules on Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (inherited, benign polyposis can 387 mouth, feet, hands, genitalia cause bowel obstruction;  cancer risk, mainly GI)

Multiple colon polyps, osteomas/soft tissue tumors, Gardner syndrome (subtype of FAP)

Abdominal pain, ascites, hepatomegaly Budd-Chiari syndrome (posthepatic venous thrombosis) 392

Hyperphagia, hypersexuality, hyperorality Klüver-Bucy syndrome (bilateral amygdala lesion)

Resting tremor, athetosis, chorea Basal ganglia lesion “Worst headache of my life” Subarachnoid hemorrhage

Resting tremor, rigidity, akinesia, postural instability, Parkinson disease (loss of dopaminergic neurons in

Chorea, dementia, caudate degeneration Huntington disease (autosomal dominant CAG repeat 520 expansion)

Nystagmus, intention tremor, scanning speech, bilateral Multiple sclerosis 523 internuclear ophthalmoplegia

Café-au-lait spots, Lisch nodules (iris hamartoma), Neurofibromatosis type I 525 cutaneous neurofibromas, pheochromocytomas, optic gliomas

Vascular birthmark (port-wine stain) of the face Nevus flammeus (benign, but associated with Sturge-525 Weber syndrome)

Renal cell carcinoma (bilateral), hemangioblastomas, von Hippel-Lindau disease (dominant tumor suppressor 525 angiomatosis, pheochromocytoma gene mutation)

Hyperreflexia, hypertonia, Babinski sign present UMN damage 529

Hyporeflexia, hypotonia, atrophy, fasciculations LMN damage 529

Spastic weakness, sensory loss, bowel/bladder dysfunction Spinal cord lesion 530

Unilateral facial drooping involving forehead LMN facial nerve (CN VII) palsy; UMN lesions spare the 532 forehead

Episodic vertigo, tinnitus, hearing loss Ménière disease 534

Ptosis, miosis, anhidrosis Horner syndrome (sympathetic chain lesion) 540

Conjugate horizontal gaze palsy, horizontal diplopia Internuclear ophthalmoplegia (damage to MLF; may be 543 unilateral or bilateral)

Polyuria, renal tubular acidosis type II, growth failure, Fanconi syndrome (multiple combined dysfunction of the 586 electrolyte imbalances, hypophosphatemic rickets proximal convoluted tubule)

Athlete with polycythemia 2° to erythropoietin injection

Periorbital and/or peripheral edema, proteinuria (> 3.5g/ Nephrotic syndrome day), hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia

Hereditary nephritis, sensorineural hearing loss,  Alport syndrome (mutation in collagen IV) retinopathy, lens dislocation

Streak ovaries, congenital heart disease, horseshoe kidney, Turner syndrome (45,XO) 638 cystic hygroma at birth, short stature, webbed neck, lymphedema

Red, itchy, swollen rash of nipple/areola Paget disease of the breast (sign of underlying neoplasm) 650

Fibrous plaques in tunica albuginea of penis with Peyronie disease (connective tissue disorder) 651 abnormal curvature

Hypoxemia, polycythemia, hypercapnia Chronic bronchitis (hyperplasia of mucous cells, “blue

Pink complexion, dyspnea, hyperventilation Emphysema (“pink puffer,” centriacinar [smoking] or

Bilateral hilar adenopathy, uveitis Sarcoidosis (noncaseating granulomas)  AFP in amniotic fluid/maternal serum Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome 63

Large granules in phagocytes, immunodeficiency Chédiak-Higashi disease (congenital failure of 117 phagolysosome formation)

Recurrent infections, eczema, thrombocytopenia Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome 117

Optochin sensitivity Sensitive: S pneumoniae; resistant: viridans streptococci 134 (S mutans, S sanguis)

Novobiocin response Sensitive: S epidermidis; resistant: S saprophyticus 134 Bacitracin response Sensitive: S pyogenes (group A); resistant: S agalactiae 134 (group B)

Branching gram ⊕ rods with sulfur granules Actinomyces israelii 139

Hilar lymphadenopathy, peripheral granulomatous lesion Ghon complex (1° TB: Mycobacterium bacilli) 140 in middle or lower lung lobes (can calcify)

Cardiomegaly with apical atrophy Chagas disease (Trypanosoma cruzi) 158

Enlarged cells with intranuclear inclusion bodies “Owl eye” appearance of CMV 165

Eosinophilic globule in liver Councilman body (viral hepatitis, yellow fever), represents 168 hepatocyte undergoing apoptosis

Eosinophilic inclusion bodies in cytoplasm of Negri bodies of rabies

Ring-enhancing brain lesion on CT/MRI in AIDS Toxoplasma gondii, CNS lymphoma

Psammoma bodies Meningiomas, papillary thyroid carcinoma, 211 mesothelioma, papillary serous carcinoma of the

Sheets of medium-sized lymphoid cells with scattered Burkitt lymphoma (t[8:14] c-myc activation, associated 430 pale, tingible body–laden macrophages (“starry sky” with EBV; “starry sky” made up of malignant cells) histology) • Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS consequence of aging)

Stacks of RBCs Rouleaux formation (high ESR, multiple myeloma) 423 Azurophilic peroxidase ⊕ granular inclusions in Auer rods (AML, especially the promyelocytic [M3] type) 432 granulocytes and myeloblasts “Brown” tumor of bone Hyperparathyroidism or osteitis fibrosa cystica (deposited 464 hemosiderin from hemorrhage gives brown color) “Soap bubble” in femur or tibia on x-ray Giant cell tumor of bone (generally benign) 464

Raised periosteum (creating a “Codman triangle”) Aggressive bone lesion (eg, osteosarcoma, Ewing 465 sarcoma, osteomyelitis) “Onion skin” periosteal reaction Ewing sarcoma (malignant small blue cell tumor) 465 Anti-IgG antibodies Rheumatoid arthritis (systemic inflammation, joint 466 pannus, boutonniere and swan neck deformities)

Rhomboid crystals, ⊕ birefringent Pseudogout (calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals) 467 Needle-shaped, ⊝ birefringent crystals Gout (monosodium urate crystals) 467  uric acid levels Gout, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, tumor lysis syndrome, 467 loop and thiazide diuretics “Bamboo spine” on x-ray Ankylosing spondylitis (chronic inflammatory arthritis: 469 HLA-B27)

Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs: anti-Smith and anti-SLE (type III hypersensitivity) 470 dsDNA)

Anti-histone antibodies Drug-induced SLE (eg, hydralazine, isoniazid, 250 phenytoin, procainamide)

Bloody or yellow tap on lumbar puncture Xanthochromia (due to subarachnoid hemorrhage) 513 Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion in neuron Lewy body (Parkinson disease and Lewy body dementia) 520 Extracellular amyloid deposition in gray matter of brain Senile plaques (Alzheimer disease)

Depigmentation of neurons in substantia nigra Parkinson disease (basal ganglia disorder: rigidity, resting 520 tremor, bradykinesia)

Silver-staining spherical aggregation of tau proteins in Pick bodies (Pick disease: progressive dementia, changes 520 neurons in personality)

Streptococcus pneumoniae Penicillin/cephalosporin (systemic infection, pneumonia), 187, vancomycin (meningitis) 190

Staphylococcus aureus MSSA: nafcillin, oxacillin, dicloxacillin 188, (antistaphylococcal penicillins); MRSA: vancomycin, 190, daptomycin, linezolid, ceftaroline 195

Enterococci Vancomycin, aminopenicillins/cephalosporins 189, 190

Rickettsia rickettsii Doxycycline, chloramphenicol 192

Clostridium difficile Oral metronidazole; if refractory, oral vancomycin 190, 195

Mycobacterium tuberculosis RIPE (rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol) 196

Influenza Oseltamivir, zanamivir 201

CMV Ganciclovir, foscarnet, cidofovir 202

Patent ductus arteriosus Close with indomethacin; keep open with PGE analogs 282 Stable angina Sublingual nitroglycerin 304

Kawasaki disease IVIG, aspirin 314

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener) Cyclophosphamide, corticosteroids 315

Arrhythmia in damaged cardiac tissue Class IB antiarrhythmic (lidocaine, mexiletine) 322 Prolactinoma Cabergoline/bromocriptine (dopamine agonists) 330 Diabetes insipidus Desmopressin (central); hydrochlorothiazide, 338 indomethacin, amiloride (nephrogenic)

SIADH Fluid restriction, IV hypertonic saline, conivaptan/ 338 tolvaptan, demeclocycline

Diabetic ketoacidosis Fluids, insulin, K+ 347

Diabetes mellitus type 2 Dietary intervention, oral hypoglycemics, and insulin (if 347 refractory)

Pheochromocytoma α-antagonists (eg, phenoxybenzamine)

Crohn disease Corticosteroids, infliximab, azathioprine

Ulcerative colitis 5-ASA preparations (eg, mesalamine), 6-mercaptopurine, 382 infliximab, colectomy

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (M3) All-trans retinoic acid, arsenic trioxide

Drug of choice for anticoagulation in pregnancy or renal Low-molecular-weight heparin

Long-term anticoagulation Warfarin, dabigatran, rivaroxaban and apixaban 436, 437

Warfarin reversal Fresh frozen plasma (acute), vitamin K (non-acute) 436

Osteoporosis Calcium/vitamin D supplementation (prophylaxis); 462 bisphosphonates, PTH analogs, SERMs, calcitonin, denosumab (treatment)

Chronic gout Xanthine oxidase inhibitors (eg, allopurinol, febuxostat); 467 pegloticase; probenecid

Acute gout attack NSAIDs, colchicine, glucocorticoids 467

Migraine Abortive therapies (eg, sumatriptan, NSAIDs); prophylaxis 518 (eg, propranolol, topiramate, CCBs, amitriptyline)

Multiple sclerosis Disease-modifying therapies (eg, β-interferon, 523 natalizumab); for acute flares, use IV steroids

Tonic-clonic seizures Levetiracetam, phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine 544

Anorexia Nutrition, psychotherapy, SSRIs 567

Alcoholism Disulfiram, acamprosate, naltrexone, supportive care 571 ADHD Methylphenidate, amphetamines, CBT, atomoxetine, guanfacine, clonidine

Bipolar disorder Mood stabilizers (eg, lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine), atypical antipsychotics

Generalized anxiety disorder SSRIs, SNRIs (first line); buspirone (second line)

Benign prostatic hyperplasia α1-antagonists, 5α-reductase inhibitors, PDE-5 inhibitors 654

Infertility Leuprolide, GnRH (pulsatile), clomiphene

Prostate adenocarcinoma/uterine fibroids Leuprolide, GnRH (continuous)

Erectile dysfunction Sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil 686

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (idiopathic) Sildenafil, bosentan, epoprostenol 686

Mitochondrial inheritance Disease occurs in both males and females, inherited 59 through females only

Intellectual disability Down syndrome, fragile X syndrome 62, 63

Vitamin deficiency (USA) Folate (pregnant women are at high risk; body stores only 68 3to 4-month supply; prevents neural tube defects)

Bacterial meningitis (newborns and kids) Group B streptococcus/E coli/Listeria monocytogenes 180 (newborns), S pneumoniae/N meningitidis (kids/teens)

HLA-DR3 Diabetes mellitus type 1, SLE, Graves disease, Hashimoto 100 thyroiditis (also associated with HLA-DR5), Addison disease

HLA-DR4 Diabetes mellitus type 1, rheumatoid arthritis, Addison 100 disease

Bacteria associated with gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, and H pylori 146 gastric malignancies (eg, adenocarcinoma, MALToma)

Infection 2° to blood transfusion Hepatitis C

Food poisoning (exotoxin mediated) S aureus, B cereus

Osteomyelitis with IV drug use Pseudomonas, Candida, S aureus

UTI E coli, Staphylococcus saprophyticus (young women) 181 Sexually transmitted disease C trachomatis (usually coinfected with N gonorrhoeae)

Nosocomial pneumonia S aureus, Pseudomonas, other enteric gram ⊝ rods

Pelvic inflammatory disease C trachomatis, N gonorrhoeae

Infections in chronic granulomatous disease S aureus, E coli, Aspergillus (catalase ⊕)

Metastases to bone Prostate, breast > kidney, thyroid, lung

Metastases to brain Lung > breast > melanoma, colon, kidney

Metastases to liver Colon >> stomach > pancreas 223

S3 heart sound  ventricular filling pressure (eg, mitral regurgitation, 287 HF), common in dilated ventricles

S4 heart sound Stiff/hypertrophic ventricle (aortic stenosis, restrictive 287 cardiomyopathy)

Constrictive pericarditis TB (developing world); idiopathic, viral illness (developed 287 world)

Holosystolic murmur VSD, tricuspid regurgitation, mitral regurgitation 291

Heart murmur, congenital Mitral valve prolapse 291

Chronic arrhythmia Atrial fibrillation (associated with high risk of emboli) 295 Cyanosis (early; less common) Tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of great vessels, truncus 298 arteriosus, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, tricuspid atresia

Late cyanotic shunt (uncorrected left to right becomes Eisenmenger syndrome (caused by ASD, VSD, PDA; 299 right to left) results in pulmonary hypertension/polycythemia)

Hypertension, 2° Renal artery stenosis, chronic kidney disease (eg, 300 polycystic kidney disease, diabetic nephropathy),

Aortic aneurysm, thoracic Marfan syndrome (idiopathic cystic medial degeneration) 302 Aortic aneurysm, abdominal Atherosclerosis, smoking is major risk factor 302

Aortic aneurysm, ascending or arch 3° syphilis (syphilitic aortitis), vasa vasorum destruction 303 Sites of atherosclerosis Abdominal aorta > coronary artery > popliteal artery

Right heart failure due to a pulmonary cause Cor pulmonale

Heart valve in bacterial endocarditis Mitral > aortic (rheumatic fever), tricuspid (IV drug abuse) 310 Endocarditis presentation associated with bacterium S aureus (acute, IVDA, tricuspid valve), viridans 310 streptococci (subacute, dental procedure), S bovis (colon cancer), culture negative (Coxiella, Bartonella, HACEK)

Temporal arteritis Risk of ipsilateral blindness due to occlusion of

Recurrent inflammation/thrombosis of small/medium Buerger disease (strongly associated with tobacco) 314 vessels in extremities

Cardiac 1° tumor (kids) Rhabdomyoma, often seen in tuberous sclerosis

Cardiac tumor (adults) Metastasis, myxoma (90% in left atrium; “ball valve”)

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypotension 21-hydroxylase deficiency 1° hyperparathyroidism Adenomas, hyperplasia, carcinoma 345 2° hyperparathyroidism Hypocalcemia of chronic kidney disease 345 • Paraneoplastic (due to ACTH secretion by tumors)

Tumor of the adrenal medulla (kids) Neuroblastoma (malignant) 350

Tumor of the adrenal medulla (adults) Pheochromocytoma (usually benign) 350

Refractory peptic ulcers and high gastrin levels Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma of duodenum or 351, pancreas), associated with MEN1 352

Acute gastric ulcer associated with CNS injury Cushing ulcer ( intracranial pressure stimulates vagal 379 gastric H+ secretion)

Acute gastric ulcer associated with severe burns Curling ulcer (greatly reduced plasma volume results in 379 sloughing of gastric mucosa)

Bilateral ovarian metastases from gastric carcinoma Krukenberg tumor (mucin-secreting signet ring cells) 379 Chronic atrophic gastritis (autoimmune) Predisposition to gastric carcinoma (can also cause 379 pernicious anemia)

Alternating areas of transmural inflammation and normal Skip lesions (Crohn disease) 382 colon

Site of diverticula Sigmoid colon 383

Hepatocellular carcinoma Cirrhotic liver (associated with hepatitis B and C, alcoholism, and hemochromatosis) 1° liver cancer Hepatocellular carcinoma (chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, 392 hemochromatosis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease)

Congenital conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (black liver) Dubin-Johnson syndrome (inability of hepatocytes to

Hemochromatosis Multiple blood transfusions or hereditary HFE mutation 395 (can result in heart failure, “bronze diabetes,” and  risk of hepatocellular carcinoma)

Pancreatitis (acute) Gallstones, alcohol

Pancreatitis (chronic) Alcohol (adults), cystic fibrosis (kids)

Bleeding disorder with GpIb deficiency Bernard-Soulier syndrome (defect in platelet adhesion to 427 von Willebrand factor)

DIC Severe sepsis, obstetric complications, cancer, burns, 428 trauma, major surgery, acute pancreatitis, APL

Malignancy associated with noninfectious fever Hodgkin lymphoma 429

Type of Hodgkin lymphoma Nodular sclerosis (vs mixed cellularity, lymphocytic 429 predominance, lymphocytic depletion) t(14;18) Follicular lymphomas (BCL-2 activation, anti-apoptotic 430 oncogene) t(8;14) Burkitt lymphoma (c-myc fusion, transcription factor 430 oncogene)

Type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 430

Age ranges for patient with ALL/CLL/AML/CML ALL: child, CLL: adult > 60, AML: adult ∼ 65, CML: 432, adult 45–85 433

Malignancy (kids) Leukemia, brain tumors 432, 526 t(9;22) Philadelphia chromosome, CML (BCR-ABL oncogene, 434 tyrosine kinase activation), more rarely associated with ALL

Vertebral compression fracture Osteoporosis (type I: postmenopausal woman; type II: 462 elderly man or woman)

HLA-B27 Psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, IBD-associated 469 arthritis, reactive arthritis (formerly Reiter syndrome)

Tumor of infancy Strawberry hemangioma (grows rapidly and regresses

Actinic (solar) keratosis Precursor to squamous cell carcinoma

Atrophy of the mammillary bodies Wernicke encephalopathy (thiamine deficiency causing ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, and confusion) “Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested.” “Always read something that will make you look good if you die in the middle of it.” —P.J. O’Rourke “So many books, so little time.” “If one cannot enjoy reading a book over and over again, there is no use in reading it at all.” to Use the  Database 712 `Anatomy,

Embryology, and Neuroscience 715

This section is a database of top-rated basic science review books, sample examination books, software, websites, and apps that have been marketed to medical students studying for the USMLE Step 1. For each recommended resource, we list (where applicable) the Title, the First Author (or editor), the Current Publisher, the Copyright Year, the Number of Pages, the Approximate List Price, the Format of the resource, and the Number of Test Questions. Finally, each recommended resource receives a Rating.
N Engl) Med 344:467,t2001 Cebesoy FB, Cebesoy 0, Incebiyik A: Bilateral femur fracture in a newborn: an extreme complication of cesarean delivery. Arch Gynecol Obstet 279:73, 2009

Chang HY, Peng CC, Kao HA, et al: Neonatal subgaleal hemorrhage: clinical presentation, treatment, and predictors of poor prognosis. Pediatr Int 49(6):903, 2007

Chang PW, Newman TB, Maisels M): Update on predicting severe hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubin neurotoxicity risks in neonates. Curr Pediatr Rev January 23,t2017 [Epub ahead oftprintl

Choi H), Hahn S, Leet), et al: Surfactant lavage therapy for meconium aspiration syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neonatology 101:183,t2012

Christensen DL, Baiot), Van Naarden Braun K, et al: Prevalence and characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among children 8 years-Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012. MMWR 65(3):1,t2016

Clark SL, Hankins GD: Temporal and demographic trends in cerebral palsyfact and iction. Am) Obstet Gynecol 188:628, 2003

Colombatti R, Sainati L, Trevisanuto D: Anemia and transfusion in the neonate. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 21(1):2,t2016

Cox P, Silvestri E, Lazda E, et al: Embolism of brain tissue in intrapartum and early neonatal deaths: report of9 cases. Pediatr Dev Pathol 12(6):464, 2009

Cui Z, Zhang Y, Liang L, et al: Macular hemorrhages associated with neonatal polycythemia and thrombocytopenia: a case report. Arch Pediatr 24(2): 140, 2017 Davis RO, Phillips)B III, Harris BA)r, et al: Fatal meconium aspiration syndrome occurring despite airway management considered appropriate. Am ) Obstet GynecoIt141:731, 1985 De)ong EP, Lindenburg IT, van Klink )M, et al: Intrauterine transfusion for parvovirus B 19 infection: long term neurodevelopmental outcome. Am ) Obstet GynecoIt206(3):204.e1, 2012 Dijk PH, Hulzebos C: An evidence-based view on hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatr Suppl 101(464):3,t2012 Dijxhoorn v! ), Visser GHA, Fidler J, et al: Apgar score, meconium and acidemia at birth in relation to neonatal neurological morbidity in term infants. B)OG 86:217, 1986

Dooley SL, Pesavento D), Depp R, et al: l!econium below the vocal cords at delivery: correlation with intrapartum events.
Rev Chir Orthop Reparatrice Appar Mot. 1980;66:33-42.Herring JA, Tachdjian MO. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopedics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2014.Jessel RH, Zurakowski D, Zilkens C, Burstein D, Gray ML,  Kim YJ. Radiographic and patient factors associated with pre-radiographic osteoarthritis in hip dysplasia. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(5):1120-1129.Jowett CR, Morcuende JA, Ramachandran M. Management of con-genital talipes equinovarus using the Ponseti method: a system-atic review. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2011;93(9):1160-1164.Kim HK. Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2010;18(11):676-686.Lee SS, Mahar AT, Miesen D, Newton PO. Displaced pediat-ric supracondylar humerus fractures: biomechanical analy-sis of percutaneous pinning techniques. J Pediatr Orthop.
Obstet Gynecol 63:792, 1984

Lin Y, Ebb DH, Boepple PA, et al: Case 12-2015. A newborn boy with respiratory distress, lethargy, and hypernatremia. N Engl J Med 372(16):1550, 2015

Lindenburg IT, van Klink JM, Smits-Wintjens EH, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental and cardiovascular outcome after intrauterine transfusions for fetal anaemia: a review. Prenat Oiagn 33:815, 2013

Lindenskov PH, Castellheim A, Saugstad 00, et al: Meconium aspiration syndrome: possible pathophysiological mechanisms and future potetial therapies. Neonatology 107(3):225,t2015

Linder I, Melamed N, Kogan A, et al: Gender and birth trauma in full-term infants. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(9):1603,t2012

Lindqvist PG, Erichs K, Molnar C, et al: Characteristics and outcome of brachial plexus birth palsy in neonates. Acta Paediatr 101(6):579,t2012

Liu J, Shi Y, Dong JY, et al: Clinical characteristics, diagnosis and management of respiratory distress syndrome in full-term neonates. Clin Med J (Engl) 123:2640,t2010

Liu LY, Antaya RJ: Neonatal subgaleal hematoma from trauma during vaginal delivery without instrument use. Pediatr Dermatol 34(1):e40, 2017 Maisonneuve E, Audibert F, Guilbaud L, et al: Risk factors for severe neonatal acidosis. Obstet Gynecol 118(4):818,t2011 Malessy MJ, Pondaag W: Obstetric brachial plexus injuries. Neurosurg Clin North Am 20(1):1, 2009

Malin GL, Morris RK, Khan KS: Strength of association between umbilical cord pH and perinatal and long term outcomes: systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 340:cl471, 2010

Diseases and Injuries of the Term Newborn 633

MalIa R, Asimi R, T eli ..1A, et al: Erythropoietin monotherapy in perinatal asphyxia with moderate to severe encephalopathy: a randomized placebocontrolled trial. J Perinatol 37(5):596, 2017

Martinez-Biarge M, Madero R, Gonzalez A, et al: Perinatal morbidity and risk of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy associated with intrapartum sentinel events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(2): 148,t2012

McAdams M, Chabra 5: Umbilical cord haematoma and adrenal haemorrhage in a macrosomic neonate with anaemia. BMJ Case Rep February 3,2016

McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, et al: Efect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes.
Swollen and tight compartments and pain with passive stretching are present. This can happen underneath a cast and may actually occur when a cast is applied too tightly. It is important to educate all patients with fractures on the signs of compartment syndrome and ensure that they realize it is an emergency. Figure 198-2 The types of growth plate injury as classified by Salter and Harris. See text for descriptions of types I to V. (From Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate, J Bone Joint Surg Am 45:587–622, 1963.) This is an oblique fracture of the distal tibia without a fibula fracture. There is often no significant trauma. Patients are usually 1 to 3 years old, but can be as old as 6 and present with limping and pain with weight bearing. There may be minimal swelling and pain. Initial radiographs do not always show the fracture; if symptoms persist, a repeat x-ray in 7 to 10 days may be helpful. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Child abuse must always be considered in the differential diagnosis of a child with fractures, especially in those younger than 3 years (see Chapter 22). Common fracture patterns that should increase the index of suspicion include multiple fractures in different stages of radiographic healing, metaphyseal corner fractures (shaking), fractures too severe for the history, or fractures in nonambulatory infants. Although spiral fractures of long bones were historically considered pathognomic for abuse, they can be seen in nonabuse situations. When there is concern for child abuse, the child should have a full evaluation, which may include admission to the hospital. A thorough and well-documented physical examination should focus on soft tissue injuries, the cranium, and a funduscopic examination for retinal hemorrhages or detachment.
Pediatr 116:e356, 2005

Copel JA, Liang R, Demasio K, et al: he clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:813,e2000

Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85:20, 2009

Cruz-Martinez R, Figueras F, Hernandez-Andrade E, et al: Fetal brain Doppler to predict cesarean delivery for nonreassuring fetal status in term small-forgestational-age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 117:618, 2011

Curran PF, Jelin EB, Rand L, et al: Prenatal steroids for microcystic congenital adenomatoid malformations. J Pediatr Surg 45:145,e2010

Dashe JS, Mcintire DO, Twickler OM: Efect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1001,o2009

De Biasio P, Ginocchio G, Aicardi G, et al: Ossification timing of sacral vertebrae by ultrasound in the mid-second trimester of pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 23:1056,o2003

Debus A, Hagelstein C, Kilian A, et al: Fetal lung volume in congenital diaphragmatic hernia: association of prenatal MR imaging indings with postnatal chronic lung disease. Radiology 266(3):887,o2013

Derikx JP, De Backer A, Van De Schoot L, et al: Factors associated with recurrence and metastasis in sacrococcygeal teratoma. Br J Surg 93: 1543, 2006

Devaseelan P, Cardwell C, Bell B, et al: Prognosis of isolated mild to moderate fetal cerebral ventriculomegly: a systematic review. J Perinat Med 38:401, 20o10

De Veciana M, Major CA, Porto M: Prediction of an abnormal karyotype in fetuses with omphalocele. Prenat Diagn 14:487, 1994

DeVore GR, Falkensammer P, Sklansky MS, et al: Spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC): new technology for evaluation of the fetal heart. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 22:380, 2003

Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Bioi 686:349, 2010

Duncombe GJ, DickinsonoJE, Kikiros CS: Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(4): 950, 2002

Ecker JL, Shipp TO, Bromley B, et al: The sonographic diagnosis of DandyWalker and Dandy-Walker variant: associated indings and outcomes. Prenat Diagn 20:328, 2000

EUROCAT: Prenatal Detection Rates.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Q3. IR is subsequently shown to have a form of PRPP synthetase that shows increased enzymic activity. Why does this result in hyperuricemia? Case 8: No Bowel Movement

Patient Presentation: DW is a 48-hour-old female who has not yet had a bowel movement. Focused History: DW is the full-term product of a normal pregnancy and delivery. She appeared normal at birth. DW is the first child of parents of Northern European ethnicity. The parents are both in good health, and their family histories are unremarkable. Pertinent Findings: DW has a distended abdomen. She recently vomited small amounts of bilious (green-colored) material. Diagnosis: Meconium ileus (obstruction of the ileum by meconium, the first stool produced by newborns) was confirmed by abdominal x-rays. About 98% of full-term newborns with meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis (CF). Diagnosis of CF was subsequently confirmed with a chloride sweat test. Treatment: The ileus was successfully treated nonsurgically. For management of the CF, the family was referred to the CF center at the regional children’s hospital.
Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens. For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine). Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes.
10. See text (and Chap. 149) for a discussion of traveler’s diarrhea. (After TS Steiner, RL Guerrant: Principles and syndromes of enteric infection, in Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 7th ed, GL Mandell et al [eds]. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 2010, pp 1335–1351; RL Guerrant, DA Bobak: N Engl J Med 325:327, 1991; with permission.) can then rapidly evaluate the need for further efforts to define a specific etiology and for therapeutic intervention. Examination of a stool sample may supplement the narrative history. Grossly bloody or mucoid stool suggests an inflammatory process. A test for fecal leukocytes (preparation of a thin smear of stool on a glass slide, addition of a drop of methylene blue, and examination of the wet mount) can suggest inflammatory disease in patients with diarrhea, although the predictive value of this test is still debated. A test for fecal lactoferrin, which is a marker of fecal leukocytes, is more sensitive and is available in latex agglutination and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay formats. Causes of acute infectious diarrhea, categorized as inflammatory and noninflammatory, are listed in Table 160-1. Chronic complications may follow the resolution of an acute diarrheal episode. The clinician should inquire about prior diarrheal illness if the conditions listed in Table 160-2 are observed. Chronic diarrhea Occurs in ~1% of travelers with acute diarrhea • Protozoa account for ~1/3 of cases

Initial presentation or May be precipitated by traveler’s diarrhea exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease

Irritable bowel syndrome Occurs in ~10% of travelers with traveler’s diarrhea

Reactive arthritis Particularly likely after infection with invasive organisms (Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, Yersinia)

Hemolytic-uremic syndrome Follows infection with Shiga toxin– (hemolytic anemia, producing bacteria (Shigella dysenteriae type thrombocytopenia, and renal 1 and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli) failure)

Of the several million people who travel from temperate industrialized countries to tropical regions of Asia, Africa, and

Central and South America each year, 20–50% experience a sudden onset of abdominal cramps, anorexia, and watery diarrhea; thus traveler’s diarrhea is the most common travel-related infectious illness (Chap. 149).
No antiemetic should be used in patients withsurgical emergencies or when a specific treatment of the underlying condition is possible. Correction of dehydration, ketosis,and acidosis is helpful to reduce vomiting in most patients withviral gastroenteritis. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Diarrhea is a major cause of childhood morbidity and mortality worldwide. Deaths from diarrhea are rare in industrializedcountries, but are common elsewhere. Acute diarrhea is a majorproblem when it occurs with malnutrition or in the absence ofbasic medical care (see Chapter 30). In North America, mostacute diarrhea is viral and is self-limited, requiring no diagnostic testing or specific intervention. Bacterial agents tend to causemuch more severe illness and typically are seen in food-associated outbreaks or in regions with poor public sanitation. Bacterial enteritis should be suspected when there is dysentery(bloody diarrhea with fever) and whenever severe symptoms arepresent. These infections can be diagnosed by stool culture orother assays for specific pathogens. Chronic diarrhea lasts more than 2 weeks and has a wide range of possible causes, includingserious and benign conditions that are more difficult to diagnose. Parents use the word diarrhea to describe loose or watery stools, excessively frequent stools, or stools that are large in volume. Constipation with overflow incontinence can be mislabeled as diarrhea. A more exact definition of diarrhea is excessive daily stool liquid volume (>10 mL stool/kg body weight/day). Stool texture, volume, and frequency help to characterize the episode of diarrhea. Diarrhea may be classified by etiology or by physiologic mechanisms (secretory or osmotic).
Swollen and tight compartments and pain with passive stretching are present. This can happen underneath a cast and may actually occur when a cast is applied too tightly. It is important to educate all patients with fractures on the signs of compartment syndrome and ensure that they realize it is an emergency. Figure 198-2 The types of growth plate injury as classified by Salter and Harris. See text for descriptions of types I to V. (From Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate, J Bone Joint Surg Am 45:587–622, 1963.) This is an oblique fracture of the distal tibia without a fibula fracture. There is often no significant trauma. Patients are usually 1 to 3 years old, but can be as old as 6 and present with limping and pain with weight bearing. There may be minimal swelling and pain. Initial radiographs do not always show the fracture; if symptoms persist, a repeat x-ray in 7 to 10 days may be helpful. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Child abuse must always be considered in the differential diagnosis of a child with fractures, especially in those younger than 3 years (see Chapter 22). Common fracture patterns that should increase the index of suspicion include multiple fractures in different stages of radiographic healing, metaphyseal corner fractures (shaking), fractures too severe for the history, or fractures in nonambulatory infants. Although spiral fractures of long bones were historically considered pathognomic for abuse, they can be seen in nonabuse situations. When there is concern for child abuse, the child should have a full evaluation, which may include admission to the hospital. A thorough and well-documented physical examination should focus on soft tissue injuries, the cranium, and a funduscopic examination for retinal hemorrhages or detachment.
2000;48:1040-1046. 154. Pieracci FM, Lin Y, Rodil M, et al. A prospective, controlled clinical evaluation of surgical stabilization of severe rib frac-tures. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(2):187-194. 155. Tepas JJ. The national pediatric trauma registry: a legacy of commitment to control childhood injury. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2004;13:126-132. 156. Gardner AR, Diz DI, Tooze JA, Miller CD, Petty J. Injury pat-terns associated with hypotension in pediatric trauma patients: Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24810/12/18   6:22 PM 249TRAUMACHAPTER 7a national trauma database review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg.
Hypotension in children may be due to TBI rather than hypovolemia and should be considered in the appropriate clinic scenario.156After initial evaluation based on the trauma ABCs, iden-tification and management of specific injuries proceeds. Acute traumatic brain injury is the most common cause of death and disability in any pediatric age group. Although falls are the most common mechanism overall, severe brain injury most often is due to child abuse (in children <2 years) or motor vehicle col-lisions (in those >2 years). Head CT should be performed to determine intracranial pathology, followed by skull radiogra-phy to diagnose skull fractures. As in adults, CPP is monitored, and appropriate resuscitation is critical to prevent the second-ary insults of hypoxemia and hypovolemia. Although some data indicate that the pediatric brain recovers from traumatic injury better than the adult brain, this advantage may be eliminated if hypotension is allowed to occur.As is true in adults, the vast majority of thoracic trauma is also blunt. However, because a child’s skeleton is not completely calcified, it is more pliable. Significant internal organ damage may occur without overlying bony fractures. For example, adult patients with significant chest trauma have a 70% incidence of rib fractures, whereas only 40% of children with significant chest trauma do. Pneumothorax is treated similarly in the pediatric population; patients who are asymptomatic with a pneumothorax of <15% are admitted for observation, whereas those who have a pneumothorax of >15% or who require positive pressure ventilation undergo tube decompression. Presence of a hemothorax in this age group may be particularly problematic because the child’s chest may contain his or her entire blood volume. If the chest tube output is initially 20% of the patient’s blood volume (80 mL/kg) or is persistently >1 to 2 mL/kg per hour, thoracotomy should be considered. Aortic injuries are rare in children, and tracheobronchial injuries are more amenable to nonoperative management. Penetrating thoracic trauma, although uncom-mon, has 35% operative intervention rate, which is consid-erably higher than that of the adult population.157 Thoracic injuries are second only to brain injuries as the main cause of death according to the National Pediatric Trauma Registry; however, the overall mortality rate of 15% correlates with the levels in many adult studies.The evaluation for abdominal trauma in the pediatric patient is similar to that in the adult. FAST is valid in the pedi-atric age group to detect intra-abdominal fluid.
CT evaluation and/or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) prior to surgery. Aortography is the gold standard for evaluation. Basic trauma management (ABCs); emergent surgery for defect repair. ■Three or more adjacent ribs fractured at two points, causing paradoxical inward movement of the ﬂail segment with inspiration. Other signs of suspected child abuse are spiral fractures in the limbs, bucket-handle fractures, bruises, and rib fractures. Marfan’s syndrome, syphilis, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome all predispose to a weak aortic wall. Aortic disruption is often associated with first and second rib, scapular, and sternal fractures. Kehr’s sign: Referred shoulder pain due to diaphragmatic irritation (classically on the left due to spleen rupture). Hx/PE: Presents with crepitus and abnormal chest wall movement. Abnormal chest wall movement may not be appreciated if the patient is splinting because of pain. Dx: Primarily clinical, although CXR, O2 saturation, and blood gases may help. Tx: O2, narcotic analgesia. Respiratory support, including intubation and mechanical ventilation, may be needed to treat hypoxemia in severe cases. Surgical fixation of the chest wall is generally needed. Cx: Respiratory compromise is a complication due to underlying pulmonary contusion.
Displaced pediat-ric supracondylar humerus fractures: biomechanical analy-sis of percutaneous pinning techniques. J Pediatr Orthop. 2002;22(4):440-443.Lincoln TL, Suen PW. Common rotational variations in children. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2003;11(5):312-320.Loder RT, Aronsson DD, Weinstein SL, Breur GJ, Ganz R, Leunig M. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Instr Course Lect. 2008;57:473-498.Mahan ST, Katz JN, Kim YJ. To screen or not to screen? A decision analysis of the utility of screening for developmental dysplasia of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(7):1705-1719.Murray AW, Wilson NI. Changing incidence of slipped capital fem-oral epiphysis: a relationship with obesity? J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008;90(1):92-94.O’Donnell S. Pediatric ankle fractures.
Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). M3. Electrolyte changes in tumor lysis syndrome. Treatment for AML M3. A 50-year-old man presents with early satiety, splenomegaly, and bleeding. Cytogenetics show t(9,22). Diagnosis? Heinz bodies? An autosomal-recessive disorder with a defect in the GPIIbIIIa platelet receptor and ↓ platelet aggregation. Virus associated with aplastic anemia in patients with sickle cell anemia. A 25-year-old African-American man with sickle cell anemia has sudden onset of bone pain. Management of pain crisis? A significant cause of morbidity in thalassemia patients. Treatment? ↓ Ca2+, ↑ K+, ↑ phosphate, ↑ uric acid.
Exam shows an anterior mediastinal mass. Suspected diagnosis? Microcytic anemia with ↓ serum iron, ↓ total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and normal or ↑ ferritin. Microcytic anemia with ↓ serum iron, ↓ ferritin, and ↑ TIBC. An 80-year-old man presents with fatigue, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and isolated lymphocytosis. Suspected diagnosis? The lymphoma equivalent of CLL. A late, life-threatening complication of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Auer rods on blood smear. AML subtype associated with DIC. Both have ↑ hematocrit and RBC mass, but polycythemia vera should have normal O2 saturation and low erythropoietin levels. “FAT RN”: Fever, Anemia, Thrombocytopenia, Renal dysfunction, Neurologic abnormalities. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute renal failure. Emergent large-volume plasmapheresis, corticosteroids, antiplatelet drugs. Usually resolves spontaneously; may require IVIG and/or corticosteroids.
All of these findings make the diagnosis of hemolytic anemia compelling. Hemoglobinuria may be overt in a random urine sample; if it is not, it may be helpful to obtain serial urine samples, because hemoglobinuria can vary dramatically from day to day and even from hour to hour. The bone marrow is usually cellular, with marked to massive erythroid hyperplasia, often with mild to moderate dyserythropoietic features (not to be confused with myelodysplastic syndrome). At some stage of the disease, the marrow may become hypocellular or even frankly aplastic (see below). FIGURE 129-9 Consecutive urine samples from a patient with par-oxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). The variation in the severity of hemoglobinuria within hours is probably unique to this condition. The definitive diagnosis of PNH must be based on the demonstration that a substantial proportion of the patient’s red cells have an increased susceptibility to complement (C), due to the deficiency on their surface of proteins (particularly CD59 and CD55) that normally protect the red cells from activated C. The sucrose hemolysis test is unreliable; in contrast, the acidified serum (Ham) test is highly reliable but is carried out only in a few labs. The gold standard today is flow cytometry, which can be carried out on granulocytes as well as on red cells. A bimodal distribution of cells, with a discrete population that is CD59 and CD55 negative, is diagnostic of PNH. In PNH patients, this population is at least 5% of the total red cells and at least 20% of the total granulocytes. patHopHysiology Hemolysis in PNH is mainly intravascular and is due to an intrinsic abnormality of the red cell, which makes it exquisitely sensitive to activated C, whether it is activated through the alternative pathway or through an antigen-antibody reaction. The former mechanism is mainly responsible for chronic hemolysis in PNH; the latter explains why the hemolysis can be dramatically exacerbated in the course of a viral or bacterial infection. Hypersusceptibility to C is due to deficiency of several protective membrane proteins (Fig. 129-10), of which CD59 is the most important, because it hinders the insertion into the membrane of C9 polymers. The molecular basis for the deficiency of these proteins has been pinpointed not to a defect in any of the respective genes, but rather to the shortage of a unique glycolipid molecule, GPI (Fig.
As a rule, a serum ferritin >200 μg/L means there is at least some iron in tissue stores. Bone Marrow Examination A bone marrow aspirate and smear or a needle biopsy can be useful in the evaluation of some patients with anemia. In patients with hypoproliferative anemia and normal iron status, a bone marrow is indicated. Marrow examination can diagnose primary marrow disorders such as myelofibrosis, a red cell maturation defect, or an infiltrative disease (Figs. 77-14 to 77-16). The increase or decrease of one cell lineage (myeloid vs erythroid) compared to another is obtained by a differential count of nucleated cells in a bone marrow smear (the myeloid/erythroid [M/E] ratio). A patient with a hypoproliferative anemia (see below) and a reticulocyte production index <2 will demonstrate an M/E ratio of 2 or 3:1. In contrast, patients with hemolytic disease and a production index >3 will have an M/E ratio of at least 1:1. Maturation disorders are identified from the discrepancy between the M/E ratio and the reticulocyte production index (see below). Either the marrow smear or biopsy can be stained for the presence of iron stores or iron in developing red cells. The storage iron is in the form of ferritin or hemosiderin. On carefully prepared bone marrow smears, small ferritin granules can normally be seen under oil immersion in 20–40% of developing erythroblasts. Such cells are called sideroblasts. FIguRE 77-14 Normal bone marrow. This is a low-power view of a section of a normal bone marrow biopsy stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
The presence of jaundice suggests hemolysis. Petechiae and purpura indicate a coagulopathy. Hepatosplenomegaly and adenopathy suggest infiltrative disorders. Growth failure or poor weight gain suggests an anemia of chronic disease. An essential element of the physical examination is the investigation of the stool for the presence of occult blood. A hemoglobin or hematocrit test indicates the severity of the anemia. Once anemia has been substantiated, the workup should include a complete blood count with differential, platelet count, indices, and reticulocyte count. Examination of the peripheral blood smear assesses the morphology of RBCs (Fig. 150-2), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets. All cell lines should be scrutinized to determine whether anemia is the result of a process limited to the erythroid line or a process that affects other marrow elements. Using data obtained from the indices and reticulocyte count, the workup can be organized on the basis of whether RBC production is adequate or inadequate and whether the cells are microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic (see Fig. 150-1). An appropriate bone marrow response to anemia would be an elevated absolute reticulocyte number, suggestingincreased production and implying either hemolysis orblood loss. Anemia with a normal reticulocyte number suggests decreased or ineffective production for the degree ofanemia. Reticulocytopenia signifies an acute onset so thatthe marrow has not had adequate time to respond, thatreticulocytes are being destroyed in the marrow (antibodymediated), or that intrinsic bone marrow disease is present.The best indicators of the severity of hemolysis are the hemoglobin level and the elevation of the reticulocyte count.
he signs and symptoms vary greatly and depend on the degree of occlusion and the intensity of the inlammatory response. Ginsberg and coworkers (1992) reported that 58 of 60 antepartum women-97 percent-had left leg thromboses. Blanco-Molina and coworkers (2007) reported left-leg involvement in 78 percent. Greer (2003) hypothesizes that this results from compression of the left iliac vein by the right iliac and ovarian artery, both of which cross the vein only on the left side. Yet, as described in Chapter 53 (p. 1026), the ureter is compressed more on the right side. Classically, thrombosis involving the lower extremity is abrupt in onset, and there is pain and edema of the leg and thigh. The thrombus typically involves much of the deepvenous system to the iliofemoral region. Occasionally, relex arterial spasm causes a pale, cool extremity with diminished pulsations. Alternatively, there may be appreciable clot, yet little pain, heat, or swelling. Importantly, calf pain, either spontaneous or in response to squeezing or to Achilles tendon stretching-Homans sign-may be caused by a strained muscle or contusion. Between 30 and 60 percent of women with a confirmed lower-extremity acute deep-vein thrombosis have an asymptomatic pulmonary embolism (p. 1016). Clinical diagnosis of deep-vein thrombosis is diicult, and in an earlier study of pregnant women, the clinical diagnosis was conirmed in only 10 percent (Hull, 1990). Another challenge is that many of the common diagnostic tests that have been investigated extensively in nonpregnant patients have not been validated appropriately in pregnancy (Huisman, 2015). Shown in Figure 52-2 is one diagnostic algorithm recommended by the American College of Chest Physicians that can be used for evaluation of pregnant women (Guyate, 2012). With a few modifications, we follow a similar evaluation at Parkland Hospital.
Shown in Figure 52-2 is one diagnostic algorithm recommended by the American College of Chest Physicians that can be used for evaluation of pregnant women (Guyate, 2012). With a few modifications, we follow a similar evaluation at Parkland Hospital. In pregnant women with suspected deep-vein thrombosis, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend compression ultrasonography of the proximal veins as the initial diagnostic test. According to the American College of Chest Physicians, this noninvasive technique is currently the most-used irst-line test to detect deep-vein thrombosis (Guyatt, 2012). The diagnosis is based on the noncompressibility and typical echoarchitecture of a thrombosed vein. For nonpregnant patients with suspected thrombosis, the safety of withholding anticoagulation for 1 week has been established for those who have a compression ultrasound examination that is initially normal (Birdwell, 1998; Heijboer, 1993). Serial compression examinations are then performed because isolated undetected calf thromboses that ultimately extend into the proximal veins will do so within 1 to 2 weeks of presentation in approximately a fourth of patients. Pregnant women with suspected

Negative, but isolated iliac vein thrombosis is suspecteda

Doppler ultrasound of iliac vein, or CT-or MR-imaging or venography

FIGURE 52-2 Algorithm for evaluation of suspected deep-vein thrombosis in pregnancy. CT = computed tomography; MR = magnetic resonance. aSigns and symptoms include swelling of the entire leg, with or without flank, buttock, or back pain. (Data from Guyatt GH,

Akl EA, Crowther M, et al: Executive summary: Antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College ofChest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines, Chest. 2012 Feb;141(2 Suppl):7S-47S.) In pregnant women, the important caveat is that normal findings with venous ultrasonography do not always exclude a pulmonary embolism. his is because the thrombosis may have already embolized or because it arose from iliac or other deeppelvic veins, which are less accessible to ultrasound evaluation (Goldhaber, 2004). As discussed, thrombosis associated with pulmonary embolism during pregnancy commonly originates in the iliac veins.
Q1. Based on the findings, which enzyme of the urea cycle is most likely to be deficient in this patient? A. Arginase

B. Argininosuccinate lyase

C. Argininosuccinate synthetase

D. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I

E. Ornithine transcarbamoylase Q2. Why is Arg supplementation helpful in this case? Q3. In individuals with partial (milder) deficiency of urea cycle enzymes, the level of which one of the following would be expected to be decreased during periods of physiologic stress? A. Alanine

B. Ammonia

C. Glutamine

D. Insulin

E. pH

Case 10: Calf Pain

Patient Presentation: CR is a 19-year-old female who is being evaluated for pain and swelling in her right calf. Focused History: Ten days ago, CR had her spleen removed following a bicycle accident in which she fractured her tibial eminence, necessitating immobilization of the right knee. She has had a good recovery from the surgery. CR is no longer taking pain medication but has continued her oral contraceptives (OCP). Pertinent Findings: CR’s right calf is reddish in color (erythematous) and warm to the touch. It is visibly swollen. The left calf is normal in appearance and is without pain. An ultrasound is ordered. Diagnosis: CR has a deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
Morris and associates (2015) studied measures of vas cular compliance before pregnancy, during pregnancy, and postpartum. Compared with healthy nonpregnant controls, stifness, measured using pulse wave velocity, were observed between the prepregnant and the postpartum time periods. sibly help explain why the risk of preeclampsia is reduced in subsequent pregnancies. Antecubital venous pressure remains unchanged during pregnancy. In the supine position, however, femoral venous pressure rises steadily, from approximately 8 mm Hg early in pregnancy to 24 mm Hg at term. Venous blood flow in the legs is retarded during pregnancy except when the lateral recumbent position is assumed (Wright, 1950). his tendency toward blood stagnation in the lower extremities during later pregnancy is attriburable to occlusion of the pelvic veins and inferior vena cava by the enlarged uterus. he elevated venous pressure returns to normal when the pregnant woman lies on her side and immediately after delivery (McLennan, 1943). These alterations contribute to the dependent edema frequently experienced and to the development of varicose veins in the legs and vulva, as well as hemorrhoids. These changes also predispose to deep-vein thrombosis. In approximately 10 percent of women, supine compression of the great vessels by the uterus causes signiicant arterial hypotension, sometimes referred to as the supine hypotensive syndrome (Kinsella, 1994). Also when supine, uterine arterial pressure-and thus uterine blood flow-is signiicantly lower than that in the brachial artery. Evidence to support whether this directly afects fetal heart rate patterns in uncomplicated low-risk pregnancies is conlicting (Armstrong, 2011; Ibrahim, 2015; Tamas, 2007). Similar changes can also be seen with hemorrhage or with spinal analgesia. • Renin, Angiotensin II, and Plasma Volume

The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is intimately involved in blood pressure control via sodium and water balance.
N Engl J Med 373(3):252, 2015

Grossman KB, Arya R, Peixoto AB, et al: Maternal and pregnancy characteristics afect plasma ibrin monomer complexes and D-dimer reference ranges for venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 215(4):466.e1,t2016

Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, et al: Executive summary: Antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 141:7S, 2012

Guyton AC, Lindsey A W, Gilluly J]: The limits of right ventricular compensation following acute increase in pulmonary circulatory resistance. Circ Res 2:326, 1954

Hague WM: Homocysteine and pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1 :459, 2003

Hall B, Truitt SG, Scheunemann LP, et al: The prevalence of clinically relevant incidental findings on chest computed tomographic angiograms ordered to diagnose pulmonary embolism. Arch Intern Med 169: 1961, 2009

Harris SA, Velineni R, Davies AH: Inferior vena cava ilters in pregnancy: a systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol 27(3):354, 2016

Heijboer H, Buller HR, Lensing A W, et al: A comparison of real-time compression ultrasonography with impedance plethysmography for the diagnosis of deepvein thrombosis in symptomatic outpatients. N Engl] Med 329: 1365, 1993

Horlocker TT, Wedel D], Rowlingson JC, et al: Executive summary: Regional anesthesia in the patient receiving anti thrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based guideline, 3rd ed. Reg Anesth Pain Med 35:102,t2010

HuismanY, Klok FA: Current challenges in diagnostic imaging of venous thromboembolism. Hematology m Soc Hematol Educ Program 2015:202,t2015

Hull RD, Raskob GF, Carter CJ: Serial IPG in pregnancy patients with clinically suspected DVT: clinical validity of negative findings. Ann Intern Med 112:663, 1990

Ilonczai P, Olah Z, Selmeczi A, et al: Management and outcomes of pregnancies in women with antirhrombin deficiency: a single-center experience and review of literature. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 26(7):798, 2015

Jacobsen AF, Qvigstad E, Sandset PM: Low molecular weight heparin (dalteparin) for the treatment of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. BJOG 110:139,t2003

Jacobsen AF, Skjeldstad FE, Sandset PM: Incidence and risk patterns of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy and puerperium-a register-based casecontrol study. Am] Obstet Gynecol 198:233.e1, 2008

James AH, Jamison MG, Brancazio LR, et al: Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy and the postpartum period: incidence, risk factors, and mortality. Am] Obstet Gynecol 194: 1311, 2006

Jamjute P, Reed N, Hinwood D: Use of inferior vena cava ilters in thromboembolic disease during labor: case report with a literature review.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
FIguRE 39-18 Retinitis pigmentosa with black clumps of pigment known as “bone spicules.” The patient had peripheral visual field loss with sparing of central (macular) vision. Leber’s congenital amaurosis, a rare cone dystrophy, has been treated by replacement of the missing RPE65 protein through gene therapy, resulting in modest improvement in visual function. Some forms of retinitis pigmentosa occur in association with rare, hereditary systemic diseases (olivopontocerebellar degeneration, Bassen-Kornzweig disease, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, Refsum’s disease). Chronic treatment with chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, and phenothiazines (especially thioridazine) can produce visual loss from a toxic retinopathy that resembles retinitis pigmentosa. Epiretinal Membrane This is a fibrocellular tissue that grows across the inner surface of the retina, causing metamorphopsia and reduced visual acuity from distortion of the macula. A crinkled, cellophane-like membrane is visible on the retinal examination. Epiretinal membrane is most common in patients over 50 years of age and is usually unilateral. Most cases are idiopathic, but some occur as a result of hypertensive retinopathy, diabetes, retinal detachment, or trauma. When visual acuity is reduced to the level of about 6/24 (20/80), vitrectomy and surgical peeling of the membrane to relieve macular puckering are recommended. Contraction of an epiretinal membrane sometimes gives rise to a macular hole. Most macular holes, however, are caused by local vitreous traction within the fovea. Vitrectomy can improve acuity in selected cases. Melanoma and Other Tumors Melanoma is the most common primary tumor of the eye (Fig. 39-19). It causes photopsia, an enlarging scotoma, and loss of vision.
These can be used in combinations with each other or with a low dose statin. If all else fails, use of a PCSK9 monoclonal antibody should be con-sidered. Her homocysteine level should be measured because of the synergy between that amino acid and Lp(a) with respect to thrombotic risk. Also, because of her elevated Lp(a), she should be evaluated for aortic stenosis. Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout

Ahmed A. Negm, MD, & Daniel E. Furst, MD twice daily. His symptoms are reduced at this dosage, but he com-plains of significant heartburn that is not controlled by antacids. He is then switched to celecoxib, 200 mg twice daily, and on this regimen his joint symptoms and heartburn resolve. Two years later, he returns with increased joint symptoms. His hands, wrists, elbows, feet, and knees are all now involved and appear swollen, warm, and tender. What therapeutic options should be considered at this time? What are the possible complications? A 48-year-old man presents with complaints of bilateral morning stiffness in his wrists and knees and pain in these joints on exercise. On physical examination, the joints are slightly swollen. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. His laboratory findings are also negative except for slight anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate, and positive rheumatoid factor.
Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): The physical examination was remarkable for AK’s emaciated appearance. (His body mass index was later determined to be 17.5, which put him in the underweight category.) His facial cheeks were erythematous (red in color) due to dilated blood vessels in the skin (telangiectasia). Eye movement was normal. Neither icterus (jaundice) nor edema (swelling due to fluid retention) was seen. The liver was slightly enlarged. Bedside tests revealed hypoglycemia and hyperketonemia (as acetoacetate). Blood was drawn and sent to the clinical laboratory. Pertinent Test Results:

DUI = driving under the influence; H = High; L = Low. Additional Tests: Complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear revealed a macrocytic anemia (see right image). Folate and B12 levels were ordered. Diagnosis: AK is diagnosed with alcoholism. Treatment (Immediate): Thiamine and glucose were given intravenously. Prognosis: Alcoholism (alcohol dependence) is the third most common cause of preventable death in the United States. People with alcoholism are at increased risk for liver cirrhosis, pancreatitis, gastrointestinal bleeding, and some cancers.
Fever, fatigue, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss may also be seen. Ulnar deviation of the fingers is seen with MCP joint hypertrophy (see Figure 2.9-6). Also presents with ligament and tendon deformations (e.g., swan-neck and boutonnière deformities), vasculitis, atlantoaxial subluxation (intubation risk), and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. F IGU R E 2.9-6. Rheumatoid arthritis. Note the boutonnière deformities of the digits, ulnar deviation of the fingers, MCP joint hyper trophy, and severe involvement of the PIP joints. (Reproduced, with permission, from Chan drasoma P. Concise Pathology, 3rd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1998: 978.) Labs: ■↑RF (IgM antibodies against Fc IgG) is seen in > 75% of cases. The presence of anti-CCP (cyclic citrullinated peptide) is more spe cific than RF. ■↑ ESR may also be seen. Anemia of chronic disease. Synovial ﬂuid aspirate shows turbid ﬂ uid, ↓ viscosity, and an ↑ WBC count (3000–50,000 cells/μL). Radiographs:

Early: Soft tissue swelling and juxta-articular demineralization. Late: Joint space narrowing and erosions.
This causes muscle weakness, osteoporosis, atrophy of the skin with striae, nonhealing ulcerations and ecchymoses, reduced immune resistance that increases the risk of bacterial and fungal infections, and glucose intolerance resulting from enhanced gluconeogenesis and antagonism to insulin action. Although most patients with Cushing syndrome gain weight, some lose it. Obesity is typically central, with characteristic redistribution of fat over the clavicles around the neck and on the trunk, abdomen, and cheeks. Cortisol excess may lead to insomnia, mood disturbances, depression, and even overt psychosis. With overproduction of sex steroid precursors, women may exhibit hyperandrogenism (hirsutism, acne, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, thinning of scalp hair). Masculinization is rare, and its presence suggests an autonomous adrenal origin, most often an adrenal malignancy. With overproduction of mineralocorticoids, patients may manifest arterial hypertension and hypokalemic alkalosis. The associated ﬂuid retention may cause pedal edema (Table 31.7) (154). Characteristic clinical laboratory findings associated with hypercortisolism are confined mainly to a complete blood count showing evidence of granulocytosis and reduced levels of lymphocytes and eosinophils. Increased urinary calcium secretion may be present. Table 31.7 Overlapping Conditions and Clinical Features of Cushing Syndrome

Easy bruising Facial plethora Proximal myopathy (or proximal muscle weakness) Striae (especially if reddish purple and >1 cm wide) In children, weight gain with decreasing growth

Cushing syndrome features in the general population that are common and/or less discriminatory

Features are listed in random order. ∗Cushing’s syndrome is more likely if onset of the feature is at a younger age. Causes The six recognized noniatrogenic causes of Cushing syndrome can be divided between those that are ACTH dependent and those that are ACTH independent (Table 31.8). The ACTH-dependent causes can result from ACTH secreted by pituitary adenomas or from an ectopic source. The hallmark of ACTH-dependent forms of Cushing syndrome is the presence of normal or high plasma ACTH concentrations with increased cortisol levels.
HTN often with hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis 1. High cortisol increases sensitivity of peripheral vessels to catecholamines. ii. At very high levels, cortisol cross-reacts with mineralocorticoid receptors (aldosterone is not increased). 5. 6. C. Diagnosis is based on 24-hour urine cortisol level (increased), late night salivary cortisol level (increased), and low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. 1. Low-dose dexamethasone suppresses cortisol in normal individuals but fails to suppress cortisol in all causes of Cushing syndrome. D. Plasma ACTH distinguishes ACTH-dependent causes of Cushing syndrome from ACTH-independent causes (table 15.1). 1. IfACTH-independent, next step is CT to look for an adrenal lesion. 2. IfACTH-dependent, next step is high-dose dexamethasone test. E. High-dose dexamethasone suppresses ACTH production by a pituitary adenoma (serum cortisol is lowered) but does not suppress ectopic ACTH production (serum cortisol remains high).
Figure 31.3 Evaluation of hirsute women for hyperandrogenism. Evaluation includes more than the assessment of the degree of hirsutism. When hirsutism is moderate (>9) or severe or if mild hirsutism is accompanied by features that suggest an underlying disorder, elevated androgen levels should be ruled out. Disorders to be considered include endocrinopathies, of which PCOS is the most common, and neoplasms. Plasma testosterone is best assessed in the early morning on day 4 to 10 in regularly cycling women. A 17-hydroxyprogesterone is also indicated when symptoms warrant a bioavailable testosterone measurement. *3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency in severe forms presents with mineralocorticoid and cortisol deficiency. Mild forms are diagnosed with a mean post-ACTH(1-24) stimulation: 17-hydroxypregnenolone/17-hydroxyprogesterone ratio of 11 compared to 3.4 in normals. 11β-hydroxylase deficiency presents with hypertension in the first years of life in two thirds of patients. The mild form presents with vitalization or precocious puberty without hypertension. Undiagnosed adults demonstrate hirsutism, acne, and amenorrhea. Diagnosis is confirmed with an 11-desoxycortisol level >25 ng/mL 60 minutes after ACTH(1-24) stimulation. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AOAH, adult-onset adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; HAIR-AN, hyperandrogenemia, insulin resistance-acanthosis nigricans. (See references 2–11,15.) Table 31.1 Medications Associated with Hirsutism determination of androgen conjugates to assess hirsute patients is not recommended, because hirsutism itself is an excellent bioassay of free testosterone action on the hair follicle and because these androgen conjugates arise from adrenal precursors and are likely markers of adrenal and not ovarian steroid production (8).
In patients with a negative test but a high clinical suspicion, the classic low-dose dexamethasone (0.5 mg every 6 hours for eight doses, or 2 mg over 48 hours) suppression test or urinary cortisol measurement should be performed. Measurement of elevated 24-hour urinary cortisol levels is a very sensitive (95–100%) and specific (98%) modality of diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome and is particularly useful for identifying patients with pseudo-Cushing’s syn-drome. A urinary cortisol-free excretion of less than 100 μg/dL  (in most laboratories) rules out hypercortisolism. Recently, salivary cortisol measurements using commercially available kits also have demonstrated superior sensitivity in diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome and are being increasingly used. Overall, 24-hour urinary tests for free cortisol and the overnight dexa-methasone suppression test at the 5 μg/dL cutoff have the high-est specificity for the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.103Once a diagnosis of hypercortisolism is established, further testing is aimed at determining whether it is ACTH-dependent or ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome. This is best accom-plished by measurement of plasma ACTH levels (normal 10–100 pg/mL). Elevated ACTH levels are found in patients with adrenal hyperplasia due to Cushing’s disease (15–500 pg/mL) and those with CRH-secreting tumors, but the highest levels are found in patients with ectopic sources of ACTH (>1000 pg/mL). In con-trast, ACTH levels are characteristically suppressed (<5 pg/mL) in patients with primary cortisol-secreting adrenal tumors. The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to distinguish between the causes of ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome (pituitary vs. ectopic). The standard test (2 mg dexamethasone every 6 hours for 2 days) or the overnight test (8 mg) may be used, with 24-hour urine collections for cortisol and 17-hydroxy steroids performed over the second day. Failure to suppress urinary cortisol by 50% confirms the diagnosis of an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor. Patients suspected of having ectopic tumors should also undergo testing for MTC and pheochro-mocytoma. Bilateral petrosal vein sampling also is helpful for determining whether the patient has Cushing’s disease or ecto-pic Cushing’s syndrome.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168901/03/19   11:22 AM 1690SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe CRH test also is helpful in determining the etiology of Cushing’s syndrome. Ovine CRH (1 μg/kg) is administered intravenously, followed by serial measurements of ACTH and cortisol at 15-minute intervals for 1 hour. Patients with a primary adrenal hypercortisolism exhibit a blunted response (ACTH peak <10 pg/mL), whereas those with ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome demonstrate a higher elevation of ACTH  (>30 pg/mL).
The presence of an ectopic CRH-secreting tumor should be suspected in patients whose dynamic testing suggests pituitary ACTH-dependent disease but who have rapid disease progression and very high plasma ACTH levels. The most common cause of ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome is exogenous or iatrogenic (i.e., superphysiologic therapy with corticosteroids) or factitious (self-induced). Corticosteroids are used in pharmacologic quantities to treat a variety of diseases with an inﬂammatory component. Over time, such therapy will result in Cushing syndrome. When corticosteroids are taken by the patient but not prescribed by a physician, the diagnosis may be especially challenging. The diagnostic workup for Cushing syndrome focuses on the ability to suppress autonomous cortisol secretion and whether ACTH is elevated or suppressed. According to the 2008 Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome, the initial use of one test with high diagnostic accuracy (24-hour urine free cortisol, late night salivary cortisol, 1 mg overnight or 2 mg 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test) is recommended. The 24-hour urine-free cortisol (UFC) should be used to diagnose Cushing syndrome in pregnant women and in patients with epilepsy, whereas the 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test, rather than UFC, should be used for initial testing for Cushing syndrome in patients with severe renal failure and adrenal incidentaloma. The 2-mg 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test is the optimal test in conditions that are associated with overactivation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis: depression, morbid obesity, alcoholism, and diabetes mellitus. Patients with an abnormal result should see an endocrinologist and undergo a second test, either one of the above or, in some cases, a serum midnight cortisol or dexamethasone CRH test. These guidelines are summarized in (Fig. 31.7) (154). Evaluation of suspected Cushing Syndrome Hirsutism, moon facies, striae, dorsocervical/supraclavicular fat pads,proximal muscle weakness, with no exogenous glucocorticoid use Endocrine consult exclude physiologic causes of hypercortisolism re-perform 1 or 2 of studies above,additional testing as needed Overnight dexamethasone suppression 1 mg Late night salivary cortisol (≥≥2 tests) 24 hr Urinary free cortisol

Figure 31.7 Algorithm for testing patients suspected of having Cushing syndrome (CS). Diagnostic criteria that suggest Cushing syndrome are a urinary-free cortisol (UFC) greater than the normal range for the assay, serum cortisol greater than 1.8 μg/dL (50 nmol/L) after 1 mg dexamethasone (1 mg DST), and a late night salivary cortisol greater than 145 ng/dL (4 nmol/L). (Based on recommendations from Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Within 1–2 years after the onset of clinical diabetes, morphologic changes appear in the kidney. Thickening of the GBM is a sensitive indicator for the presence of diabetes but correlates poorly with the presence or absence of clinically significant nephropathy. The composition of the GBM is altered notably with a loss of heparan sulfate moieties that form the negatively charged filtration barrier. This change results in increased filtration of serum proteins into the urine, predominately negatively charged albumin. The expansion of the mesangium due to the accumulation of extracellular matrix correlates with the clinical manifestations of diabetic nephropathy (see stages in Fig. 62e-20). This expansion in mesangial matrix is associated with the development of mesangial sclerosis. Some patients also develop eosinophilic, PAS+ nodules called nodular glomerulosclerosis or Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules. Immunofluorescence microscopy often reveals the nonspecific deposition of IgG (at times in a linear pattern) or complement staining without immune deposits on electron microscopy. Prominent vascular changes are frequently seen with hyaline and hypertensive arteriosclerosis. This is associated with varying degrees of chronic glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial changes. Renal biopsies from patients with types 1 and 2 diabetes are largely indistinguishable. These pathologic changes are the result of a number of postulated factors. Multiple lines of evidence support an important role for increases in glomerular capillary pressure (intraglomerular hypertension) in alterations in renal structure and function. Direct effects of hyperglycemia on the actin cytoskeleton of renal mesangial and vascular smooth-muscle cells as well as diabetes-associated changes in circulating factors such as atrial natriuretic factor, angiotensin II, and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) may account for this.
Proteinuria, isosthenuria, and progressive renal dysfunction occur in the second to fourth decades; ~5% of male patients with idiopathic renal failure have α-galactosidase A mutations. Hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, anginal chest pain, and congestive heart failure can occur in the third to fourth decades. About 1–3% of patients with idiopathic hypertrophic myocardiopathy have Fabry disease. Similarly, ~3–5% of male patients with idiopathic stroke at 35–50 years of age have α-galactosidase A mutations. Leg lymphedema without hypoproteinemia and episodic diarrhea also occur. Death is due to renal failure or cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease in untreated male patients. Variants with residual α-galactosidase A activity may have late-onset manifestations that are limited to the cardiovascular system and resemble hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Variants with predominant cardiac, renal, or central nervous system (CNS) manifestations are becoming better defined. Up to 70% of heterozygous females may exhibit clinical manifestations. However, in females, heart disease is the most common life-threatening manifestation, followed in frequency by stroke and then renal disease. Phenytoin and carbamazepine diminish chronic and episodic acroparesthesia. Chronic hemodialysis or kidney transplantation can be lifesaving in patients with renal failure. Enzyme therapy clears stored lipids from a variety of cells, particularly those of the renal, cardiac, and skin vascular endothelium. Renal insufficiency appears to be irreversible. Early institution of enzyme therapy may prevent or slow the progression of life-threatening complications.
This section covers the renal lesions associated with hypertension. Nephrosclerosis refers to sclerosis of small renal arteries and arterioles that is strongly associated with hypertension. The characteristic morphologic alterations of the small arterioles are called hyaline arteriolosclerosis, while the arteries show fibrous intimal and medial thickening often resulting in luminal narrowing. The vascular changes cause ischemia, which leads to various combinations of interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and focal global glomerulosclerosis. Some degree of nephrosclerosis, albeit mild, is present in many individuals older than 60 years of age. The frequency and severity of the lesions are increased at any age when hypertension or diabetes are present. Of note, many renal diseases cause hypertension, which in turn is associated with nephrosclerosis. Thus, this renal lesion often is superimposed on other primary kidney diseases. The arterial lesions associated with hypertension are the result mainly of endothelial dysfunction and platelet activation (Chapter 10). Two processes participate in the arterial lesions of nephrosclerosis: http://ebooksmedicine.net

Medial and intimal thickening, as a response to hemodynamic changes, aging, genetic defects, or some combination of these

Hyalinization of arteriolar walls, caused by extravasation of plasma proteins through injured endothelium and by increased deposition of basement membrane matrix

MORPHOLOGYGrossly,thekidneysaresymmetrically atrophic. Typicallytherenalsurfaceshowsdiffuse,finegranularitythatresemblesgrainleather.Microscopically,themostprominentchangeishyalinethickeningofthewallsofthearterioles,knownashyaline arteriolosclerosis. Thisappearsasahomogeneous,pinkhyalinethickening,attheexpenseofthevessellumina,withlossofunderlyingcellulardetail(

Fig.14.18 ).Thenarrowingofthelumenresultsinmarkedlydecreasedbloodflowthroughtheaffectedvessels,withconsequentischemiaandrenalatrophy.Inadvancedcasesofarterionephrosclerosis,theglomerulartuftsmaybecomesclerosed.Diffusetubularatrophyandinterstitialfibrosisarepresent,butinflammatoryinflltratesareabsentorscant.Thelargerbloodvessels(interlobarandarcuatearteries)showintimalthickeningwithreplicationofinternalelasticlaminaalongwithfibrousthickeningofthemedia(fibroelastic hyperplasia). This renal lesion alone rarely causes damage severe enough to produce renal failure, except in individuals from some, possibly genetically susceptible, groups, such as African Americans, in whom it may lead to uremia and death. However, all patients usually show some functional impairment, such as loss of concentrating ability or a variably diminished GFR. A mild degree of proteinuria is a frequent finding.
However, all patients usually show some functional impairment, such as loss of concentrating ability or a variably diminished GFR. A mild degree of proteinuria is a frequent finding. Fig. 14.18 Benignnephrosclerosis.High-powerviewoftwoarterioleswithhyalinedeposition,markedthickeningofthewalls,andanarrowedlumen. (Courtesy of Dr. M.A.Venkatachalam, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio,Texas.) Malignant hypertension, defined as blood pressure usually greater than 200/120 mm Hg, is far less common in the United States than essential hypertension and occurs in only about 5% of hypertensive individuals. It may arise de novo (i.e., without preexisting hypertension), or it may appear suddenly in an individual who had mild hypertension. The prevalence of malignant hypertension is higher in developing countries. It may present with severe acute kidney injury and renal failure. Renal changes are confined to the vasculature and may include thrombotic microangiopathy. The renal changes are related to hypertension and the reactions to it. Injury resulting from long-standing hypertension causes increased permeability of the vessels to fibrinogen and other plasma proteins, endothelial injury, and platelet deposition. This leads to the appearance of fibrinoid necrosis of arterioles and small arteries and intravascular thrombosis

Mitogenic factors from platelets (e.g., platelet-derived growth factor) and plasma cause intimal hyperplasia of vessels, resulting in hyperplastic arteriosclerosis. Because of the luminal narrowing, the kidneys become markedly ischemic, which leads to further elevation of blood pressure via the renin-angiotensin system. MORPHOLOGYThekidneymaybenormalinsizeorshrunken,dependingonthedurationandseverityofthehypertensivedisease.Small,pinpoint petechial hemorrhages mayappearonthecorticalsurfacefromruptureofarteriolesorglomerularcapillaries,givingthekidneyapeculiar,flea-bitten appearance.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Blood cultures are positive in a significant proportion of cases. Security of the airway is always of primary concern in acute epiglottitis, even if the diagnosis is only suspected. Mere observation for signs of impending airway obstruction is not routinely recommended, particularly in children. Many adults have been managed with observation only since the illness is perceived to be milder in this age group, but some data suggest that this approach may be risky and probably should be reserved only for adult patients who have yet to develop dyspnea or stridor. Once the airway has been secured and specimens of blood and epiglottis tissue have been obtained for culture, treatment with IV antibiotics should be given to cover the most likely organisms, particularly H. influenzae. Because rates of ampicillin resistance in this organism have risen significantly in recent years, therapy with a β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combination or a secondor third-generation cephalosporin is recommended. Typically, ampicillin/sulbactam, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, or ceftriaxone is given, with clindamycin and TMP-SMX reserved for patients allergic to β-lactams. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 7–10 days and should be tailored to the organism recovered in culture. If the household contacts of a patient with H. influenzae epiglottitis include an unvaccinated child under age 4, all members of the household (including the patient) should receive prophylactic rifampin for 4 days to eradicate carriage of H. influenzae. FIguRE 44-3 Acute epiglottitis. In this lateral soft tissue radiograph of the neck, the arrow indicates the enlarged edematous epiglottis (the “thumbprint sign”). Deep neck infections are usually extensions of infection from other primary sites, most often within the pharynx or oral cavity. Many of these infections are life threatening but are difficult to detect at early stages, when they may be more easily managed. Three of the most clinically relevant spaces in the neck are the submandibular (and sublingual) space, the lateral pharyngeal (or parapharyngeal) space, and the retropharyngeal space. These spaces communicate with one another and with other important structures in the head, neck, and thorax, providing pathogens with easy access to areas that include the mediastinum, carotid sheath, skull base, and meninges.
The throat culture remains the diagnostic gold standard. Culture of a throat specimen that is properly collected (i.e., by vigorous rubbing of a sterile swab over both tonsillar pillars) and properly processed is the most sensitive and specific means of definitive diagnosis. A rapid diagnostic kit for latex agglutination or enzyme immunoassay of swab specimens is a useful adjunct to throat culture. While precise figures on sensitivity and specificity vary, rapid diagnostic kits generally are >95% specific. Thus a positive result can be relied upon for definitive diagnosis and eliminates the need for throat culture. However, because rapid diagnostic tests are less sensitive than throat culture (relative sensitivity in comparative studies, 55–90%), a negative result should be confirmed by throat culture. In the usual course of uncomplicated streptococcal pharyngitis, symptoms resolve after 3–5 days. The course is shortened little by treatment, which is given primarily to prevent suppurative complications and ARF. Prevention of ARF depends on eradication of the organism from the pharynx, not simply on resolution of symptoms,

Common cold Common cold Pharyngoconjunctival fever Influenza Cold, croup Herpangina, hand-foot-and-mouth

Group A streptococci Pharyngitis, scarlet fever Group C or G streptococci Pharyngitis Mixed anaerobes Vincent’s angina Arcanobacterium haemolyticum Pharyngitis, scarlatiniform rash Neisseria gonorrhoeae Pharyngitis Treponema pallidum Secondary syphilis Francisella tularensis Pharyngeal tularemia Corynebacterium diphtheriae Diphtheria Yersinia enterocolitica Pharyngitis, enterocolitis Yersinia pestis Plague Chlamydiae

Chlamydia pneumoniae Bronchitis, pneumonia Chlamydia psittaci Psittacosis Mycoplasmas Mycoplasma pneumoniae Bronchitis, pneumonia and requires 10 days of penicillin treatment (Table 173-3). A first-generation cephalosporin, such as cephalexin or cefadroxil, may be substituted for penicillin in cases of penicillin allergy if the nature of the allergy is not an immediate hypersensitivity reaction (anaphylaxis or urticaria) or another potentially life-threatening manifestation (e.g., severe rash and fever). aPenicillin allergy: A first-generation cephalosporin, such as cephalexin or cefadroxil, may be substituted for penicillin in cases of penicillin allergy if the nature of the allergy is not an immediate hypersensitivity reaction (anaphylaxis or urticaria) or another potentially life-threatening manifestation (e.g., severe rash and fever). Alternative agents for oral therapy are erythromycin (10 mg/kg PO qid, up to a maximum of 250 mg per dose) and azithromycin (a 5-day course at a dose of 12 mg/kg once daily, up to a maximum of 500 mg/d). Vancomycin is an alternative for parenteral therapy. bEfficacy unproven, but recommended by several experts. See text for discussion.
Some novel targets are under investigation. For example, tarocin was found to successfully inhibit teichoic acid, a structure essential for bacterial cell wall synthesis. When combined with a β-lactam antibiotic in a mouse model, tarocin effectively killed methicillin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus that were resistant to either agent alone. Decline in the number of new systemic antibacterial drugs approved by the FDA over a 30-year period. (Reproduced, with permission, from Boucher HW et al: 10 × '20 progress-development of new drugs active against Gram-negative bacilli: An update from the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2013;56:1685. By permission of Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Modified, with permission, from Spellberg B et al: Trends in antimicrobial drug development: Implications for the future. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1279. By permission of Oxford University Press.) Camille E. Beauduy, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD*

A 45-year-old man is brought to the local hospital emer-gency department by ambulance. His wife reports that he had been in his normal state of health until 3 days ago when he developed a fever and a productive cough. Dur-ing the last 24 hours he has complained of a headache and is increasingly confused. His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis.
Presents with acute-onset high fever (39–40°C), dysphagia, drooling, a mufﬂed voice, inspiratory retractions, cyanosis, and soft stridor. Patients sit with the neck hyperextended and the chin protruding (“sniffing dog” position) and lean forward in a “tripod” position to maximize air entry. Untreated infection can lead to life-threatening airway obstruction and respiratory arrest. Diagnosed by clinical impression. The differential diagnosis must include diffuse and localized causes of airway obstruction (see Tables 2.13-5 and 2.13-6). The airway must be secured before def nitive diagnosis. In light of potential laryngospasm and airway compromise, do not examine the throat unless an anesthesiologist or otolaryngologist is present. Definitive diagnosis is made via direct fiberoptic visualization of a cherry-red, swollen epiglottis and arytenoids. Lateral x-ray shows a swollen epiglottis obliterating the valleculae (“thumbprint sign”; see Figure 2.13-3). This disease is a true emergency. Keep the patient (and parents) calm, call anesthesia, and transfer the patient to the OR. Treat with endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy and IV antibiotics (ceftriaxone or cefuroxime). Bacterial meningitis most often occurs in children < 3 years of age; common organisms include S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and E. coli. Enteroviruses are the most common agents of viral meningitis and occur in children of all ages. Risk factors include sinofacial infections, trauma, and sepsis.
These conditions are often accompanied by abdominal discomfort or pain, nausea, and vomiting and can be diagnosed by imaging studies. Fatal growth An abdominal mass can result in abdominal swelling. Enlargement of the intraabdominal organs, specifically the liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly), or an abdominal aortic aneurysm 286 can result in abdominal distention. Bladder distention also may result in abdominal swelling. In addition, malignancies, abscesses, or cysts can grow to sizes that lead to increased abdominal girth. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Determining the etiology of abdominal swelling begins with history-taking and a physical examination. Patients should be questioned regarding symptoms suggestive of malignancy, including weight loss, night sweats, and anorexia. Inability to pass stool or flatus together with nausea or vomiting suggests bowel obstruction, severe constipation, or an ileus (lack of peristalsis). Increased eructation and flatus may point toward aerophagia or increased intestinal production of gas. Patients should be questioned about risk factors for or symptoms of chronic liver disease, including excessive alcohol use and jaundice, which suggest ascites. Patients should also be asked about other symptoms of medical conditions, including heart failure and tuberculosis, which may cause ascites. Physical examination should include an assessment for signs of systemic disease. The presence of lymphadenopathy, especially supraclavicular lymphadenopathy (Virchow’s node), suggests metastatic abdominal malignancy. Care should be taken during the cardiac examination to evaluate for elevation of jugular venous pressure (JVP); Kussmaul’s sign (elevation of the JVP during inspiration); a pericardial knock, which may be seen in heart failure or constrictive pericarditis; or a murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. Spider angiomas, palmar erythema, dilated superficial veins around the umbilicus (caput medusae), and gynecomastia suggest chronic liver disease.
Although the major veins of the testis had been occluded, small collateral veins running within the scrotum and around the outer aspect of the spermatic cord permitted drainage without recurrence of the varicocele. A young woman visited her family practitioner because she had mild upper abdominal pain. An ultrasound demonstrated gallstones within the gallbladder, which explained the patient’s pain. However, when the technician assessed the pelvis, she noted a mass behind the bladder, which had sonographic findings similar to a kidney (Fig. 5.87). What did the sonographer do next? Having demonstrated this pelvic mass behind the bladder, the sonographer assessed both kidneys. The patient had a normal right kidney. However, the left kidney could not be found in its usual place. The technician diagnosed a pelvic kidney. A pelvic kidney can be explained by the embryology. The kidneys develop from a complex series of structures that originate adjacent to the bladder within the fetal pelvis. As development proceeds and the functions of the various parts of the developing kidneys change, they attain a superior position in the upper abdomen adjacent to the abdominal aorta and inferior vena cava, on the posterior abdominal wall. A developmental arrest or complication may prevent the kidney from obtaining its usual position. Fortunately, it is unusual for patients to have any symptoms relating to a pelvic kidney.
Left lower quadrant pain (rectum) with bloody diarrhea

Crypt abscesses with neutrophils (Fig. 10.21B)

Pseudopolyps; loss ofhaustra ('lead pipe' sign on imaging, Fig. 10.21C)

Toxic megacolon and carcinoma (risk is based on extent of colonic involvement and duration of disease; generally not a concern until > 10 years of disease) CROHN DISEASE

Full-thickness inflammation with knife-like fissures

Anywhere from mouth to anus with skip lesions; terminal ileum is the most common site, rectum is least common. Right lower quadrant pain (ileum) with nonbloody diarrhea

Lymphoid aggregates with granulomas (40% of cases)

Cobblestone mucosa (Fig. 10.22A), creeping fat, and strictures ('string-sign' on imaging, Fig. 10.22B)

Malabsorption with nutritional deficiency, calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, fistula formation, and carcinoma, if colonic disease is present

Arthritis (peripheral joints, ankylosing spondylitis, sacroiliitis, migratory polyarthritis), uveitis, erythema nodosum (Fig. 10.22C), pyoderma gangrenosum, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and p-ANCA

Fig. 10.21 Ulcerative colitis. A, Gross appearance. B, Crypt abscess. C, 'Lead pipe' sign (A, Courtesy of Jamie Steinmetz, MD. C, Published with permission from LearningRadiology.com)

Fig. 10.22 Crohn disease. A, Cobblestone mucosa with stricture. B, 'String' sign.
This statement does not necessarily apply to patients with intraluminal gastrointestinal hemorrhage, who can often be managed by other means (Chap. 57). Nothing will supplant an orderly, painstakingly detailed history, which is far more valuable than any laboratory or radiographic examination. This kind of history is laborious and time-consuming, making it not especially popular, even though a reasonably accurate diagnosis can be made on the basis of the history alone in the majority of cases. In cases of acute abdominal pain, a diagnosis is readily established in most instances, whereas success is not so frequent in patients with chronic pain. IBS is one of the most common causes of abdominal pain and must always be kept in mind (Chap. 352). The location of the pain can assist in narrowing the differential diagnosis (Table 20-3); however, the chronological sequence of events in the patient’s history is often more important than the pain’s location. If the examiner is sufficiently open-minded and unhurried, asks the proper questions, and listens, the patient will usually provide the diagnosis. Careful attention should be paid to the extraabdominal regions. Narcotics or analgesics should not be withheld until a definitive diagnosis or a definitive plan has been formulated; obfuscation of the diagnosis by adequate analgesia is unlikely. An accurate menstrual history in a female patient is essential. It is important to remember that normal anatomic relationships can be significantly altered by the gravid uterus. Abdominal and pelvic pain may occur during pregnancy due to conditions that do

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Irritable bowel syndrome Psychiatric disease Peritonitis Diabetes Abbreviation: GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease. not require surgery.
Parents may report that the child has diarrhea because of soiling of liquid stool. Soiling may be frequent or continuous. On further questioning, the clinician learns that the child is passing large-caliber bowel movements that may occasionally block the toilet. Children younger than 3 years of age often present with painful defecation, impaction, and withholding. The history should include a complete review of systems for gastrointestinal, endocrine, and neurologic disorders and a developmental and psychosocial history. Stool impaction can be felt on abdominal examination in about 50% of patients at presentation. Firm packed stool in the rectum is highly predictive of fecal impaction. A rectal examination allows assessment of sphincter tone and size of the rectal vault. Evaluation of anal placement and existence of anal fissures also is helpful in considering etiology and severity. A neurologic examination, including lower extremity reflexes, anal wink, and cremasteric reflexes, may reveal underlying spinal cord abnormalities. Abdominal x-ray is not required. It can be helpful to showto the family the degree of colonic distention and fecal impaction. In general further studies, such as barium enema andrectal biopsy, are indicated only if an organic cause for theconstipation is indicated by history or physical examination(see Chapter 129). Similarly although endocrinologic conditions such as hypothyroidism can cause chronic constipation,laboratory studies are not indicated without history or physicalexamination suggesting such a disorder. The differential diagnosis for functional constipation and soiling includes organic causes of constipation (e.g., neurogenic, anatomic, endocrinologic, gastrointestinal, and pharmacologic).
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient? Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysiologic responses, as described in Chapter 9. Drugs that block their receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of adrenoceptors into α1, α2, and β subtypes and the effects of activating these receptors are discussed in Chapters 6 and 9. Blockade of peripheral dopamine receptors is of limited clinical importance at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system (CNS) dopamine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these receptors are discussed in Chapters 21 and 29.
Duration: Headaches lasting > 72 hours are not migraines. Diurnal variation: Cluster headaches and those from elevated ICP usually occur or worsen at night. Triggers: Examples include chocolate and red wine. Provocative factors: Lying down may make high-ICP headaches worse; standing up may make low-ICP headaches worse. Palliative factors: Sleep clears migraines. Recent-onset headaches warrant immediate workup! If headache is associated with focal neurologic def cits, rule out more serious etiologies with CT or MRI. Rule out SAH with a CT and LP if symptoms are abrupt in onset; then consider other causes typically missed by CT (e.g., dural thrombosis, dissection, or apoplexy). If a 20-year-old female develops headaches after drinking red wine, think migraine. Associated symptoms/signs: Significant findings include fever or rash (consider meningitis or other infectious causes), jaw claudication (specific for temporal arteritis), or constitutional symptoms such as weight loss (associated with neoplastic, inﬂammatory, or infectious conditions). Photophobia, nausea, and vomiting are associated with migraine, aneurysmal SAH, and meningitis, but neck stiffness is more likely to accompany the latter two. Neurologic sequelae: Look for diplopia, mental status changes or associated symptoms (numbness, weakness, dizziness, ataxia, visual disturbances), papilledema, or pupillary abnormalities (partial CN III palsy or Horner’s syndrome). Patient risk factors: High-risk patients are > 50 years of age, immunocompromised, or with preexisting malignancy. If SAH is suspected, obtain a head CT without contrast. If CT is , LP is mandatory.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Blevins G, Macauley R, Harder A, et al. Oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis in a large kindred with a new transthyretin variant Tyr69His. Neurology 60:1625, 2003. Børgesen SE, Gjerris F: The predictive value of conductance to outflow of CSF in normal pressure hydrocephalus. Brain 105:65, 1982. Brazis PW: Clinical review: the surgical treatment of idiopathic pseudotumor cerebri. Cephalalgia 28:1361, 2008. Bruce BB, Kedar S, Van Stavern GP, et al: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension in men. Neurology 72:304, 2009. Burgett RA, Purvin VA, Kawasaki A: Lumboperitoneal shunting for pseudotumor cerebri. Neurology 49:734, 1997. Carbaat P, Van Crevel H: Lumbar puncture headache: Controlled study on the preventive effect of 24 hours’ bed rest. Lancet 2:1133, 1981. Chen CC, Luo CL, Wang SJ, et al: Colour Doppler imaging for diagnosis of intracranial hypotension. Lancet 354:826, 1999.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
Jaundice, which can be seen in any of the patterns outlined above, is a clinical sign that arises when excess bilirubin (> 2.5 mg/dL) is circulating in the blood. Figures 2.6-9 and 2.6-10 summarize the clinical approaches toward cholestasis and isolated hyperbilirubinemia. Hepatocellular injury is described in the section that follows. Inﬂammation of the liver leading to liver cell injury and necrosis. The causes of acute hepatitis include viruses (e.g., HAV, HBV, HCV, HDV, HEV) and drug-induced disease (e.g., alcohol, acetaminophen, INH, methyldopa). The

Ductal dilation? FIGURE 2.6-9. Approach to cholestasis. HCV is Chronic. Eighty percent of patients with HCV infection will develop chronic hepatitis. An AST/ALT ratio > 2 suggests alcoholic hepatitis—you’re toASTed. causes of chronic hepatitis include viruses (e.g., HBV, HCV, HDV), alcoholic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, ischemic hepatitis, and hereditary etiologies (e.g., Wilson’s disease, hemochromatosis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency). HAV and HEV are transmitted by the fecal-oral route. HBV and HCV are transmitted by bodily ﬂuids, although the risk of acquiring HCV sexually is very low. Acute hepatitis often starts with a viral prodrome of nonspecific symptoms (e.g., malaise, fever, joint pain, fatigue, URI symptoms, nausea, vomiting, changes in bowel habits) followed by jaundice and RUQ tenderness.
Jaundice during stress (e.g., severe infection); otherwise, not clinically significant

Liver is dark; otherwise, not clinically significant Rotor syndrome is similar to Dubin-Johnson syndrome, but lacks liver discoloration. Dark urine (due to bilirubinuria) and pale stool Pruritus due to t plasma bile acids Hypercholesterolemia with xanthomas Steatorrhea with malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins

Dark urine due to t urine bilirubin; urine urobilinogen is normal or decreased. Acute hepatitis; no chronic state. Anti-virus IgM marks active infection. Antivirus IgG is protective, and its presence indicates prior infection or immunization (immunization is available for HAV). HEV infection in pregnant women is associated with fulminant hepatitis (liver failure with massive liver necrosis). Results in acute hepatitis; chronic disease occurs in 20% of cases (Table 11.3). Results in acute hepatitis; chronic disease occurs in most cases. HCV-RNA test confirms infection; decreased RNA levels indicate recovery; persistence indicates chronic disease. Dependent on HBV for infection; superinfection upon existing HBV is more severe than coinfection (infection with HBV and HDV at the same time) f}~,. ,f:

Fig.11 .7 Chronic hepatitis. Table 11.3: Serologic Markers of Hepatitis B Virus

STAGE HBsAG ~! :AG AND HBV HBcAB HBsAB marker to rise) + (presence > 6 +/-; presence of

Chronic months defines HBeAg or HBV DNA IgG chronic state) indicates infectivity. II. VIRAL HEPATITIS

A. Inflammation ofliver parenchyma, usually due to hepatitis virus (Table 11.2); other causes include EBV and CMV.
A four-year-old child presents with oliguria, petechiae, and jaundice following an illness with bloody diarrhea. Most likely diagnosis and cause? Post-HBV exposure treatment. Classic causes of drug-induced hepatitis. A 40-year-old obese woman with elevated alkaline phosphatase, elevated bilirubin, pruritus, dark urine, and clay-colored stools. Hernia with highest risk of incarceration—indirect, direct, or femoral? A 50-year-old man with a history of alcohol abuse presents with boring epigastric pain that radiates to the back and is relieved by sitting forward. Management? Establish the ABCs. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) due to E. coli O157: H7. HBV immunoglobulin. TB medications (INH, rifampin, pyrazinamide), acetaminophen, and tetracycline. Biliary tract obstruction. Femoral hernia. Confirm the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis with elevated amylase and lipase.
A patient with an abnormal liver function test as part of a routine examination 3. 4. Symptoms of HCC including cachexia, abdominal pain, or fever 1. Clinical jaundice, asthenia, itching (scratches), tremors, or disorientation 2. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, skin signs of liver failure 1. Blood tests: full blood count (splenomegaly), liver function tests, ammonia levels, electrolytes, AFP and DCP (PIVKA-2), Ca2+ and Mg2+; hepatitis B, C, and D serology (and quantitative HBV DNA or HCV RNA, if either is positive); neurotensin (specific for fibrolamellar HCC) 2. Triphasic dynamic helical (spiral) CT scan of liver (if inadequate, then follow with an MRI); chest CT scan; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy (for varices, bleeding, ulcers); and brain scan (only if symptoms suggest) 3. Core biopsy: of the tumor and separate biopsy of the underlying liver 1. HCC <2 cm: RFA, PEI, or resection 2. HCC >2 cm, no vascular invasion: liver resection, RFA, or OLTX 3. Multiple unilobar tumors or tumor with vascular invasion: TACE or sorafenib 4. Bilobar tumors, no vascular invasion: TACE with OLTX for patients with tumor response 5. Extrahepatic HCC or elevated bilirubin: sorafenib or bevacizumab plus erlotinib (combination agent trials are in progress)

This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC causative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly females.
Mild or moderate cases, even if febrile, can safely be treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics. Fluoroquino-lones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are ideal for treating pyelonephritis. Nitrofurantoin should not be used as it does not penetrate renal parenchyma. Patients with concern for sepsis or inability to tolerate oral intake may require hospitalization with IV antibiotics while awaiting culture results. Fevers may persist for up to 72 hours despite appropriate treatment. The presence of persistent fevers or symptoms after this time period warrants cross-sectional imaging to rule out renal or perinephric abscess. Treatment for renal or perinephric abscess usually consists of percutaneous drainage and broad-spectrum IV antibiotics.ProstatitisAcute prostatitis is marked by fever, suprapubic or perineal pain, and new onset lower urinary tract symptoms, namely dys-uria, frequency, urgency, changes in stream caliber, or difficulty emptying the bladder. It is most often caused by urinary patho-gens. Digital rectal exam may reveal a tender and soft pros-tate. Bladder drainage with a Foley or suprapubic tube may be required if urinary retention is present. Treatment consists of a long-term course (4–6 weeks) of antibiotics. If not treated in a timely fashion, acute prostatitis can develop into severe sepsis or a prostatic abscess. Prostatic abscesses may require drainage via a transurethral approach or transrectal needle aspiration.Chronic prostatitis may be bacterial or abacterial. Symptoms in both cases include perineal, suprapubic, or penile pain, along with urinary frequency, urgency, or change in stream caliber. Men may also report pain in the groin, lower back, or testes.
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD

JH, a 63-year-old architect, complains of urinary symptoms to his family physician. He has hypertension, and during the last 8 years, he has been adequately managed with a thiazide diuretic and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. During the same period, JH developed the signs of benign prostatic hypertrophy, which eventually required prostatectomy to relieve symptoms. He now complains that he has an increased urge to urinate as well as urinary fre-quency, and this has disrupted the pattern of his daily life. What do you suspect is the cause of JH’s problem? What information would you gather to confirm your diagnosis? What treatment steps would you initiate? Cholinoceptor antagonists, like the agonists, are divided into muscarinic and nicotinic subgroups on the basis of their specific receptor affinities. Ganglion blockers and neuromuscular junction blockers make up the antinicotinic drugs. The ganglion-blocking drugs have little clinical use and are discussed at the end of this chapter. Neuromuscular blockers are heavily used and are discussed in Chapter 27. This chapter emphasizes drugs that block muscarinic cholinoceptors. Five subtypes of muscarinic receptors have been identified, primarily on the basis of data from ligand-binding and cDNA-cloning experiments (see Chapters 6 and 7). A standard terminology (M1 through M5) for these subtypes is now in common use, and evidence—based mostly on selective agonists and antagonists— indicates that functional differences exist between several of these subtypes. The X-ray crystallographic structures of the M1–4 subtypes of muscarinic receptors have been reported.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
A four-year-old child presents with oliguria, petechiae, and jaundice following an illness with bloody diarrhea. Most likely diagnosis and cause? Post-HBV exposure treatment. Classic causes of drug-induced hepatitis. A 40-year-old obese woman with elevated alkaline phosphatase, elevated bilirubin, pruritus, dark urine, and clay-colored stools. Hernia with highest risk of incarceration—indirect, direct, or femoral? A 50-year-old man with a history of alcohol abuse presents with boring epigastric pain that radiates to the back and is relieved by sitting forward. Management? Establish the ABCs. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) due to E. coli O157: H7. HBV immunoglobulin. TB medications (INH, rifampin, pyrazinamide), acetaminophen, and tetracycline. Biliary tract obstruction. Femoral hernia. Confirm the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis with elevated amylase and lipase.
(Repro duced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 1804.) For partial obstruction, supportive care may be sufficient and should include NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and Foley catheterization to monitor ﬂ uid status. Surgery is required in cases of complete SBO, vascular compromise (necrotic bowel), or symptoms lasting > 3 days without resolution. Exploratory laparotomy may be performed with lysis of adhesions, resection of necrotic bowel, and evaluation for stricture, IBD, and hernias. There is a 2% mortality risk for a nonstrangulated SBO; strangulated SBO is associated with up to a 25% mortality rate depending on the time between diagnosis and treatment. A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern. Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction. Risk factors include recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobility, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, DM, and medications that slow GI motility (e.g., anticholinergics, opioids). Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements. Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds. A rectal exam is required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly patients. Diffusely distended loops of small and large bowel are seen on supine AXR with air-ﬂuid levels on upright view. A Gastrografin study can rule out partial obstruction; CT can rule out neo-In diagnosing ileus, look for plasms.
Color? Vital Signs: Tachypnea? Pulsus paradoxus? Oximetry-evidence of desaturation? Chest: Wheezes, rales, rhonchi, diminished breath sounds? Hyperinflated? Cardiac exam: JVP elevated? Precordial impulse? Gallop? Murmur? Extremities: Edema? Cyanosis? At this point, diagnosis may be evident—if not, proceed to further evaluation

Chest radiograph Assess cardiac size, evidence of CHF Assess for hyperinflation Assess for pneumonia, interstitial lung disease, pleural effusions

If diagnosis still uncertain, obtain cardiopulmonary exercise test

FIGuRE 47e-2 Algorithm for the evaluation of the patient with dyspnea. JVP, jugular venous pulse; CHF, congestive heart failure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CT, computed tomography. (Adapted from RM Schwartzstein, D Feller-Kopman, in E Braunwald, L Goldman [eds].
Dyspnea is the most common presenting symptom, but this complaint is far from specific for the diagnosis of PH. PH symptoms are insidious and overlap considerably with many common conditions, including asthma and other lung disease and cardiac disease. The symptoms of PH are often nonspecific and variable. Most patients will present with dyspnea and/or fatigue, whereas edema, chest pain, presyncope, and frank syncope are less common and associated with more advanced disease. On examination, there may be evidence of right ventricular failure with elevated jugular venous pressure, lower extremity edema, and ascites. Additionally, the cardiovascular examination may reveal an accentuated P2 component of the second heart sound, a right-sided S3 or S4, and a holosystolic tricuspid regurgitant murmur. It is also important to seek signs of the diseases that are often concurrent with PH: clubbing may be seen in some chronic lung diseases, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia may signify scleroderma, and crackles and systemic hypertension may be clues to left-sided systolic or diastolic heart failure. Once clinical suspicion is raised, a systematic approach to diagnosis and assessment is essential. An echocardiogram with (if indicated) a bubble study is the most important screening test. Echocardiography is important for the diagnosis of PH and often essential for determining the cause. All forms of PH may demonstrate a hypertrophied and

FIGURE 304-1 The left panels show examples of plexogenic pulmonary arteriopathy. These are obstructive and proliferative lesions of the small muscular pulmonary arteries, composed primarily of endothelial cells with intermixed inflammatory cells, myofibroblasts, and connective tissue components. The lower left panel demonstrates proliferating cells (red PCNA stained cells). Panels on the right demonstrate medial hypertrophy of muscular pulmonary arteries. (Photographs on the left are courtesy of Dr. Stephen Archer, Queen’s University School of Medicine, Kingston,

Ontario, Canada.)
These lesions, reminiscent of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, are prominent on the face, hands, lips, and oral mucosa (Fig. 382-5).A greater number of telangiectasias correlates with the extent of microvascular complications,includingPAH.Breakdown ofatrophicskinleadsto chronic ulcerations at the extensor surfaces of the proximal interphalangealjoints,thevolarpadsofthefingertips,andbonyprominencessuchas the elbows and malleoli. Ulcers are painful and may become secondarily infected, resulting in osteomyelitis. Healing of ischemic fingertip ulcerations leaves characteristic fixed digital “pits.” Loss of soft tissue at the fingertipsdue to ischemiais frequentandmaybeassociated withstriking resorption of the terminal phalanges (acro-osteolysis) (Fig. 382-6). Calcium deposits (calcinosis) in the skin and soft tissues occur in patients with lcSSc who are positive for anticentromere antibodies. The deposits, varying in size from tiny punctate lesions to large conglomerate masses, are composed of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals and can be readily visualized on plain x-rays. Frequent locations include the finger pads, palms, extensor surfaces of the forearms, and the olecranon and prepatellar bursae (Fig. 382-7). They may occasionally ulcerate through the overlying skin, producing drainage of chalky white material, pain, and local inflammation. Paraspinal soft tissue calcifications may cause neurologic complications. FIGUrE 382-6 Acro-osteolysis. Notedissolutionofterminalphalan-gesinapatientwithlong-standinglimitedcutaneoussystemicsclero-sis(lcSSc)andRaynaud’sphenomenon. Pulmonary involvement is frequent in SSc and is the leading cause of death. The two principal forms are ILD and pulmonary vascular disease.
Infants, but not older children, frequently present withsigns of heart failure. Sudden death may be the initial presentation in older children. Dyspnea, fatigue, chest pain,syncope or near-syncope, and palpitations may be present.A murmur is heard in more than 50% of children referred after identification of an affected family member. Restrictive cardiomyopathies are relatively rare in pediatrics. Presentingsymptoms usually include dyspnea exacerbated by a respiratory illness, syncope, hepatomegaly, and an S4 heart sound on examination. Duchenne muscular dystrophy Other muscular dystrophies (Becker, limb-girdle) Myotonic dystrophy Kearns-Sayre syndrome (progressive external ophthalmoplegia) Carnitine deficiency syndromes Endocardial fibroelastosis Mitochondrial myopathy syndromes Familial dilated cardiomyopathy (dominant, recessive, X-linked) Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Familial restrictive cardiomyopathy Pompe disease (glycogen storage)

Viral (e.g., coxsackievirus infection, mumps, Epstein-Barr virus infection, influenza, parainfluenza infection, measles, varicella, HIV infection)

Rickettsial (e.g., psittacosis, Coxiella infection, Rocky Mountain spotted fever)

Bacterial (e.g., diphtheria, Mycoplasma infection, meningococcal disease, leptospirosis, Lyme disease)

Parasitic (e.g., Chagas disease, toxoplasmosis)

Hypothyroidism Hyperthyroidism Pheochromocytoma Mitochondrial myopathies and oxidative respiratory chain defects Type II, X-linked 3-methylglutaconic aciduria

HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus. Etiology Infectious Sporadic Infiltrative (amyloidosis, sarcoidosis) Metabolic Inherited (autosomal dominant) Noninfiltrative (idiopathic, familial) Toxic

Storage disease (hemochromatosis, Fabry Idiopathic

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Cardiomegaly usually is seen on chest radiographs for all three types of cardiomyopathies. The electrocardiogram (ECG) in dilated cardiomyopathy may have nonspecific ST-T wave changes and left ventricular hypertrophy. ECG evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy is present in 25% of children with cardiomyopathy. The ECG with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is universally abnormal, but changes are nonspecific. Primary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated with a prolonged QT interval. Children with restrictive cardiomyopathies may show atrial enlargement on the ECG. Echocardiography features vary by type of cardiomyopathy. Dilated cardiomyopathies result in left atrial and ventricular dilation, a decreased shortening fraction, and globally depressed contractility. Asymmetrical septal hypertrophy and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction are seen in hyper-trophic cardiomyopathies.
Left atrial myxoma or hepatopulmonary syndrome should be considered when the patient complains of platypnea—i.e., dyspnea in the upright position with relief in the supine position. The physical examination should begin during the interview of the patient. Inability of the patient to speak in full sentences before stopping to get a deep breath suggests a condition that leads to stimulation of the controller or impairment of the ventilatory pump with reduced vital capacity. Evidence of increased work of breathing (supraclavicular retractions; use of accessory muscles of ventilation; and the tripod position, characterized by sitting with the hands braced on the knees) is indicative of increased airway resistance or stiffness of the lungs and the chest wall. When measuring the vital signs, the physician should accurately assess the respiratory rate and measure the pulsus paradoxus (Chap. 288); if the systolic pressure decreases by >10 mmHg, the presence of COPD, acute asthma, or pericardial disease should be considered. During the general examination, signs of anemia (pale conjunctivae), cyanosis, and cirrhosis (spider angiomata, gynecomastia) should be sought. Examination of the chest should focus on symmetry of movement; percussion (dullness is indicative of pleural effusion; hyperresonance is a sign of emphysema); and auscultation (wheezes, rhonchi, prolonged expiratory phase, and diminished breath sounds are clues to disorders of the airways; rales suggest interstitial edema or fibrosis). The cardiac examination should focus on signs of elevated right heart pressures (jugular venous distention, edema, accentuated pulmonic component to the second heart sound); left ventricular dysfunction (S3 and S4 gallops); and valvular disease (murmurs). When examining the abdomen with the patient in the supine position, the physician should note whether there is paradoxical movement of the abdomen: inward motion during inspiration is a sign of diaphragmatic weakness, and rounding of the abdomen during exhalation is suggestive of pulmonary edema. Clubbing of the digits may be an indication of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, and joint swelling or deformation as well as changes consistent with Raynaud’s disease may be indicative of a collagen-vascular process that can be associated with pulmonary disease. History Quality of sensation, timing, positional disposition Persistent vs intermittent Physical Exam

General appearance: Speak in full sentences? Accessory muscles? Color? Vital Signs: Tachypnea?
Systemic complaints and weight loss should point to other etiologies of pancytopenia. Prior drug use, chemical exposure, and preceding viral illnesses must often be elicited with repeated questioning. A family history of hematologic diseases or blood abnormalities, of pulmonary or liver fibrosis, or of early hair graying points to a telomeropathy. 666 Physical Examination Petechiae and ecchymoses are typical, and retinal hemorrhages may be present. Pelvic and rectal examinations can often be deferred but, when performed, should be undertaken with great gentleness to avoid trauma; these will often show bleeding from the cervical os and blood in the stool. Pallor of the skin and mucous membranes is common except in the most acute cases or those already transfused. Infection on presentation is unusual but may occur if the patient has been symptomatic for a few weeks. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are highly atypical of aplastic anemia. Café au lait spots and short stature suggest Fanconi anemia; peculiar nails and leukoplakia suggest dyskeratosis congenita; early graying (and use of hair dyes to mask it!) suggests a telomerase defect. LABORATORY STUDIES Blood The smear shows large erythrocytes and a paucity of platelets and granulocytes. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is commonly increased. Reticulocytes are absent or few, and lymphocyte numbers may be normal or reduced. The presence of immature myeloid forms suggests leukemia or MDS; nucleated red blood cells (RBCs) suggest marrow fibrosis or tumor invasion; abnormal platelets suggest either peripheral destruction or MDS. Bone Marrow The bone marrow is usually readily aspirated but dilute on smear, and the fatty biopsy specimen may be grossly pale on withdrawal; a “dry tap” instead suggests fibrosis or myelophthisis.
F IGU R E 2.7 -2. Blood cell differentiation. CBC, reticulocyte count

Retic < 2.5 Retic > 2.5

Iron deficiency anemia in an elderly patient could be due to colorectal cancer and needs to be evaluated to rule out malignancy. Iron deficiency anemia can be due to a hookworm infection. FIGURE 2.7-3. Anemia algorithm. Symptoms include fatigue, weakness, brittle nails, and pica. If the anemia develops slowly, patients are generally asymptomatic. Physical findings include glossitis, angular cheilitis, and koilonychia (“spoon nails”). Bone marrow biopsy looking for evidence of iron stores is the gold standard but is seldom performed. Iron deficiency is often confused with anemia of chronic disease, in which iron use by the body is impaired. Labs can help differentiate the two conditions (see Table 2.7-4). Peripheral blood smear shows hypochromic and microcytic RBCs with a low reticulocyte count. Low serum ferritin reﬂects low body stores of iron and confirms the diagnosis. However, ferritin is also an acute-phase reactant and may thus obscure evidence of iron deficiency.
Exam shows an anterior mediastinal mass. Suspected diagnosis? Microcytic anemia with ↓ serum iron, ↓ total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and normal or ↑ ferritin. Microcytic anemia with ↓ serum iron, ↓ ferritin, and ↑ TIBC. An 80-year-old man presents with fatigue, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and isolated lymphocytosis. Suspected diagnosis? The lymphoma equivalent of CLL. A late, life-threatening complication of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Auer rods on blood smear. AML subtype associated with DIC. Both have ↑ hematocrit and RBC mass, but polycythemia vera should have normal O2 saturation and low erythropoietin levels. “FAT RN”: Fever, Anemia, Thrombocytopenia, Renal dysfunction, Neurologic abnormalities. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute renal failure. Emergent large-volume plasmapheresis, corticosteroids, antiplatelet drugs. Usually resolves spontaneously; may require IVIG and/or corticosteroids.
Because it is a systemic disease, RA may result in a variety of extraarticular manifestations, including fatigue, subcutaneous nodules, lung involvement, pericarditis, peripheral neuropathy, vasculitis, and hematologic abnormalities. Insights gained by a wealth of basic and clinical research over the past two decades have revolutionized the contemporary paradigms for the diagnosis and management of RA. Serum antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCPs) are routinely used along with rheumatoidfactorasabiomarkerofdiagnosticandprognosticsignificance. Advances in imaging modalities have improved our ability to detect jointinflammationanddestructioninRA.ThescienceofRAhastaken a major leap forward with the identification of new disease-related genes and further deciphering of the molecular pathways of disease pathogenesis. The relative importance of these different mechanisms hasbeenhighlighted by the observedbenefitsofthenewclassofhighly targeted biologic and small-molecule therapies. Despite these gains, incomplete understanding of the initiating pathogenic pathways of RA remains a sizable barrier to its cure and prevention. The last two decades have witnessed a remarkable improvement in the outcomes of RA. The historic descriptions of crippling arthritis are currently encounteredmuch less frequently.Much of thisprogress can be traced to the expanded therapeutic armamentarium and the adoption of early treatment intervention. The shift in treatment strategy dictates a new mind-set for primary care practitioners—namely, one that demands early referral of patients with inflammatory arthritis to a rheumatologist for prompt diagnosis and initiation of therapy. Only then will patients achieve their best outcomes. The incidence of RA increases between 25 and 55 years of age, after which it plateaus until the age of 75 and then decreases. The presenting symptoms of RA typically result from inflammation of the joints, tendons, and bursae. Patients often complain of early morning joint stiffness lasting more than 1 h that eases with physical activity. The earliest involved joints are typically the small joints of the hands and feet. The initial pattern of joint involvement may be monoarticular, oligoarticular (≤4 joints), or polyarticular (>5 joints), usually in a symmetric distribution.
Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy suggest an underlying lymphoproliferative disease, whereas petechiae suggest platelet dysfunction. Past laboratory measurements are helpful to determine a time of onset. In the anemic patient, physical examination may demonstrate a forceful heartbeat, strong peripheral pulses, and a systolic “flow” murmur. The skin and mucous membranes may be pale if the hemoglobin is <80–100 g/L (8–10 g/dL). This part of the physical examination should focus on areas where vessels are close to the surface such as the mucous membranes, nail beds, and palmar creases. If the palmar creases are lighter in color than the surrounding skin when the hand is hyperextended, the hemoglobin level is usually <80 g/L (8 g/dL). Table 77-1 lists the tests used in the initial workup of anemia. A routine complete blood count (CBC) is required as part of the evaluation and includes the hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell indices: the mean cell volume (MCV) in femtoliters, mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) in picograms per cell, and mean concentration of hemoglobin per volume of red cells (MCHC) in grams per liter (non-SI: grams per deciliter). The red cell indices are calculated as shown in Table 77-2, and the normal variations in the hemoglobin and hematocrit with age are shown in Table 77-3. A number of physiologic factors affect the CBC, including age, sex, pregnancy, smoking, and altitude. High-normal hemoglobin values may be seen in men and women who live at altitude or smoke heavily. Hemoglobin elevations due to smoking reflect normal compensation due to the displacement of O2 by CO in hemoglobin binding. Other important information is provided by the reticulocyte count and measurements of iron supply including serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC; an indirect measure of serum transferrin), and serum ferritin. Marked alterations in the red cell indices usually reflect disorders of maturation or iron deficiency. A careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear is important, and clinical laboratories often provide a description of both the red and white cells, a white cell differential count, and the platelet count.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
In comparison to an adult who can concentrate urine to 1200 mOsm/kg, infants can concentrate urine at best to 600 mOsm/kg. While infants are capable of secreting antidiuretic hormone, ADH, the aquaporin water channel–mediated osmotic water permeability of the infant’s collecting tubules is severely limited compared to that of adults, leading to an insensitivity to ADH.Sodium requirements range from 2 mEq/kg per day in term infants up to 5 mEq/kg per day in critically ill preterm infants as a consequence of salt wasting. Potassium require-ments are on the order of 1 to 2 mEq/kg per day. Calcium and magnesium supplementation of IV fluids is essential to prevent laryngospasm, dysrhythmias, and tetany.Acid-Base EquilibriumAcute metabolic acidosis usually implies inadequate tissue perfusion and is a serious disorder in children. Potentially life-threatening causes that are specific for the pediatric population must be sought; they include intestinal ischemia from necro-tizing enterocolitis (in the neonate), midgut volvulus, or incar-cerated hernia. Other causes include chronic bicarbonate loss from the gastrointestinal tract or acid accumulation as in chronic renal failure. Respiratory acidosis implies hypoventilation, the cause of which should be apparent. Treatment of acute meta-bolic acidosis should be aimed at restoring tissue perfusion by addressing the underlying abnormality first. For severe meta-bolic acidemia where the serum pH is less than 7.25, sodium bicarbonate should be administered using the following guide-line: base deficit × weight in kilograms × 0.5 (in newborns). The last factor in the equation should be 0.4 for smaller children and 0.3 for older children. The dose should be diluted to a concentra-tion of 0.5 mEq/mL because full-strength sodium bicarbonate is hyperosmolar. One-half the corrective dose is given, and the serum pH is measured again. During cardiopulmonary resusci-tation (CPR), one-half the corrective dose can be given as an intravenous bolus and the other half given slowly intravenously.Respiratory alkalosis is usually caused by hyperventila-tion, which is readily correctable. Metabolic alkalosis most commonly implies gastric acid loss, as in the child with pyloric stenosis, or aggressive diuretic therapy. In the child with gastric fluid loss, IV fluids of 5% dextrose, 0.5% normal saline, and  20 mEq KCl/L usually correct the alkalosis.Blood Volume and Blood ReplacementCriteria for blood transfusion in infants and children remain poorly defined.
3. Physical examination. Assess blood pressure, adiposity distribution (central versus generalized), markers of comorbidities (acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism, hepatomegaly, orthopedic abnormalities), and physical stigmata of a genetic syndrome (explains fewer than 5% of cases). 4. Laboratory studies. These are generally reservedfor children who are obese (BMI > 95th percentile),who have evidence of comorbidities, or both. Other studies should be guided by findings in the historyand physical examination. The American Academy ofPediatrics endorses the government guidelines from2011, which recommend that all 9to 11-year-olds bescreened for cholesterol. Other useful laboratory testsmay include hemoglobin A1c, fasting lipid profile,fasting glucose levels, liver function tests, and thyroidfunction tests (if there is a faster increase in weightthan height). The approach to therapy and aggressiveness of treatmentshould be based on risk factors, including age, severity ofoverweight and obesity, and comorbidities, as well as familyhistory and support. The primary goal for all children withuncomplicated obesity and fast-rising weight-for-height isto achieve healthy eating and activity patterns. For children with a secondary complication, specific treatment of thecomplication is an important goal. Childhood and adolescentobesity treatment programs can lead to sustained weight lossand decreases in BMI when treatment focuses on behavioral changes and is family centered. Concurrent changes in dietaryand physical activity patterns are most likely to provide success (Table 29-5). Goal setting needs to be specific and attainable.
BMI (body mass index; BMI = wt (kg) ÷ Ht2 (m)) is a convenient screening tool that correlates fairly strongly with body fatness in children and adults. BMI age-specific and gender-specific percentile curves (for 2to 20-year-olds) allow an assessment of BMI percentile (available online at http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts ). Table 29-3 provides BMI interpretation guidelines. For children younger than 2 years of age, weight-for-length measurements greater than 95th percentile may indicate overweight and warrant further assessment. A BMI for age and gender above the 95th percentile is strongly associated with excessive body fat and is associated with multiple cardiovascular disease risk factors. Early recognition of excessive rates of weight gain, overweight, or obesity in children is essential because the earlier the interventions, the more likely they are to be successful. Alström syndrome Hypogonadism, retinal degeneration, deafness, diabetes mellitus

Carpenter syndrome Polydactyly, syndactyly, cranial synostosis, mental retardation

Hyperinsulinism Nesidioblastosis, pancreatic adenoma, hypoglycemia, Mauriac syndrome

Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Retinal degeneration, syndactyly, Biedl hypogonadism, mental retardation, autosomal recessive syndrome

Muscular dystrophy Late onset of obesity

Prader-Willi syndrome Neonatal hypotonia, normal growth immediately after birth, small hands and feet, mental retardation, hypogonadism; some have partial deletion of chromosome 15

Pseudohypoparathyroidism Variable hypocalcemia, cutaneous calcifications

Turner syndrome Ovarian dysgenesis, lymphedema, web neck; XO chromosome *These diseases represent <5% of cases of childhood obesity. www.cdc.gov/healthyweight

Routine evaluation at well-child visits should include the following: 1. Anthropometric data, including weight, height, and calculation of BMI. Data should be plotted on age-appropriate and gender-appropriate growth charts and assessed for BMI trends (see Table 29-3). 2. Dietary and physical activity history (Table 29-4). Assess patterns and potential targets for behavioral change. 3. Physical examination.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Entire capsule must be examined microscopically. 3. FNA only examines cells and not the capsule; hence, a distinction between follicular adenoma and follicular carcinoma cannot be made by FNA. B. Metastasis generally occurs hematogenously. V.

A. Malignant proliferation of parafollicular C cells; comprises 5% of thyroid carcinomas 1. C cells are neuroendocrine cells that secrete calcitonin. 2. Calcitonin lowers serum calcium by increasing renal calcium excretion but is inactive at normal physiologic levels. 3. High levels of calcitonin produced by tumor may lead to hypocalcemia. 4. Calcitonin often deposits within the tumor as amyloid. B. Biopsy reveals sheets of malignant cells in an amyloid stroma (Fig. 15.7). C. Familial cases are often due to multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A and 2B, which are associated with mutations in the RET oncogene.
TSH receptor antibodies are seen in patients with Graves’ disease. The most Popular is Papillary:

Check calcitonin levels if medullary cancer is suspected. Thyroid nodules are very common and show an ↑ incidence with age. Most are benign. Usually asymptomatic on initial presentation. Hyperfunctioning nodules present with hyperthyroidism and local symptoms (dysphagia, dyspnea, cough, choking sensation) and are associated with a  family history (especially medullary thyroid cancer). An ↑ risk of malignancy is associated with a history of neck irradiation, “cold” nodules on radionuclide scan, male sex, age < 20 or > 70, firm and fixed solitary nodules, a  family history (especially medullary thyroid cancer), and rapidly growing nodules with hoarseness. Check for anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. Carcinoma (see Table 2.3 4) may be frm and f xed. Medullary thyroid carcinoma is associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2 and familial medullary thyroid cancer. The best method of assessing a nodule for malignancy is f ne-needle aspiration (FNA), which has high sensitivity and moderate specificity. TFTs (TSH to exclude hyperfunction). Ultrasound determines if the nodule is solid or cystic; a radioactive scan determines whether it is hot or cold (cancers are usually cold and solid). Hot nodules are never cancerous and should not be biopsied. TABLE 2.3-4.
The incidence of thyroid cancer is ~12/100,000 per year in the United States and increases with age. Prognosis is worse in older persons (>65 years). Thyroid cancer is twice as common in women as men, but male gender is associated with a worse prognosis. Additional important risk factors include a history of childhood head or neck irradiation, large nodule size (≥4 cm), evidence for local tumor fixation or invasion into lymph nodes, and the presence of metastases (Table 405-11). Several unique features of thyroid cancer facilitate its management: (1) thyroid nodules are amenable to biopsy by FNA; (2) iodine radioisotopes can be used to diagnose (123I) and treat (131I) differentiated thyroid cancer, reflecting the unique uptake of this anion by the thyroid gland; and (3) serum markers allow the detection of

History of head and neck irradiation, Family history of thyroid cancer, MEN including total-body irradiation for 2, or other genetic syndromes associ bone marrow transplant and brain ated with thyroid malignancy (e.g., radiation for childhood leukemia Cowden’s syndrome, familial polypo sis, Carney complex)

Exposure to ionizing radiation from fallout in childhood or adolescence Vocal cord paralysis, hoarse voice

Age <20 or >65 years Nodule fixed to adjacent structures

Abbreviation: MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia. Disorders of the Thyroid Gland 2304 residual or recurrent disease, including the use of Tg levels for PTC and FTC, and calcitonin for medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). Thyroid neoplasms can arise in each of the cell types that populate the gland, including thyroid follicular cells, calcitonin-producing C cells, lymphocytes, and stromal and vascular elements, as well as metastases from other sites (Table 405-10). The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) has designated a staging system using the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) classification (Table 405-12). Several other classification and staging systems are also widely used, some of which place greater emphasis on histologic features or risk factors such as age or gender. PATHOGENESIS AND GENETIC BASIS Radiation Early studies of the pathogenesis of thyroid cancer focused on the role of external radiation, which predisposes to chromosomal breaks, leading to genetic rearrangements and loss of tumor-suppressor genes. External radiation of the mediastinum, face, head, and neck region was administered in the past to treat an array of conditions, including acne and enlargement of the thymus, tonsils, and adenoids. Radiation exposure increases the risk of benign and malignant thyroid nodules, is associated with multicentric cancers, and shifts the incidence of thyroid cancer to an earlier age group. Radiation from nuclear fallout also increases the risk of thyroid cancer. Children seem more predisposed to the effects of radiation than adults. Of note, radiation derived from 131I therapy appears to contribute minimal increased risk of thyroid cancer.
In addition, benign nodules and various forms of thyroid cancer are relatively common and amenable to detection by physical examination. The thyroid (Greek thyreos, shield, plus eidos, form) consists of two lobes connected by an isthmus. It is located I anterior to the trachea between the cricoid cartilage and

The thyroid gland develops from the floor of the primitive pharynx 2283 during the third week of gestation. The developing gland migrates along the thyroglossal duct to reach its final location in the neck. This feature accounts for the rare ectopic location of thyroid tissue at the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) as well as the occurrence of thyroglossal duct cysts along this developmental tract. Thyroid hormone synthesis normally begins at about 11 weeks’ gestation. Neural crest derivatives from the ultimobranchial body give rise to thyroid medullary C cells that produce calcitonin, a calcium-lowering hormone. The C cells are interspersed throughout the thyroid gland, although their density is greatest in the juncture of the upper one-third and lower two-thirds of the gland. Calcitonin plays a minimal role in calcium homeostasis in humans but the C-cells are important because of their involvement in medullary thyroid cancer. Thyroid gland development is orchestrated by the coordinated expression of several developmental transcription factors. Thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, TTF-2, and paired homeobox-8 (PAX-8) are expressed selectively, but not exclusively, in the thyroid gland. In combination, they dictate thyroid cell development and the induction of thyroid-specific genes such as thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroid peroxidase (TPO), the sodium iodide symporter (Na+/I–, NIS), and the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSH-R). Mutations in these developmental transcription factors or their downstream target genes are rare causes of thyroid agenesis or dyshormonogenesis, although the causes of most forms of congenital hypothyroidism remain unknown (Table 405-1). Because congenital hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 1 in 4000 newborns, neonatal screening is now performed in most industrialized countries (see below). Transplacental passage of maternal thyroid hormone occurs before the fetal thyroid gland begins to function and provides partial hormone support to a fetus with congenital hypothyroidism.
N, nucleus; JC, junctional complex. 14,000. (Courtesy of Dr. Holger Jastrow). An extensive network of fenestrated capillaries derived from the superior and inferior thyroid arteries surrounds the follicles. Blind-ended lymphatic capillaries are present in the interfollicular connective tissue and may also provide a second route for conveying the hormones from the gland. Thyroid gland function is essential to normal growth and development. The thyroid gland produces three hormones, each of which is essential to normal metabolism and homeostasis (Table 21.7):  Thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine, T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) are synthesized and secreted by the follicular cells. Both hormones regulate cell and tissue basal metabolism and heat production and influence body growth and development. Secretion of these hormones is regulated by TSH released from the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland.  Calcitonin (thyrocalcitonin) is synthesized by the parafollicular cells (C cells) and is a physiologic antagonist to parathyroid hormone (PTH). Calcitonin has an important role in regulating serum calcium levels in lower animals; however, its physiological role in humans remains elusive. Calcitonin lowers blood calcium levels by suppressing the

FIGURE 21.15 • Electron micrograph of a parafollicular cell. Cytoplasmic processes of follicular cells (arrows) partially surround the parafollicular cell (PC), which contains numerous electron-dense granules and a prominent Golgi apparatus (G). A basal lamina (BL) is associated with the follicular cells (FC). A portion of the central mass of colloidal material (C) in two adjacent follicles can be seen in the left corners of the micrograph.
Angina, if present, is usually manifested by episodic, inconsolable crying that coincides with feeding. As discussed previously, evidence of poor peripheral perfusion, such as extreme pallor, indicates severe LVOT obstruction. Differen-tial cyanosis is an uncommon finding, but it is present when enough antegrade flow occurs only to maintain normal upper body perfusion, while a large patent ductus arteriosus produces blue discoloration of the abdomen and legs.Physical findings include a systolic ejection murmur, although a quiet murmur may paradoxically indicate a more severe condition with reduced cardiac output. A systolic click correlates with a valvular etiology of obstruction. As LV dys-function progresses, evidence of congestive heart failure occurs.The chest radiograph is variable but may show dilatation of the aortic root, and the ECG often demonstrates LV hypertro-phy. Echocardiography with Doppler flow is extremely useful in establishing the diagnosis, as well as quantifying the transvalvular gradient. Furthermore, echocardiography can facilitate evaluation for the several associated defects that can be present in critical neonatal AS, including mitral stenosis, LV hypoplasia, LV endo-cardial fibroelastosis, subaortic stenosis, VSD, or coarctation. The presence of any or several of these defects has important impli-cations related to treatment options for these patients. Although cardiac catheterization is not routinely performed for diagnostic purposes, it can be invaluable as part of the treatment algorithm if the lesion is amenable to balloon valvotomy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is another very useful technique for assessing the adequacy of the left-sided structures and is increasingly utilized to determine candidacy for biventricular repairs.Treatment. As alluded to previously, the first decision that must be made in the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction is whether the patient is a candidate for biventricular or univen-tricular repair. Central to this decision is assessment of the degree of hypoplasia of the LV and other left-sided structures. Alsoufi and colleagues25 have described a rational approach to the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction. The options vary depending on whether the infant follows a single or a 3biventricular pathway. The options for a single ventricle include the Norwood operation, a hybrid strategy (initial ductal stent and bilateral pulmonary artery bands followed by later completion of the Norwood operation) or heart transplantation.
ECG and chest x-ray findings are normal in mild stenosis. Moderate to severe stenosis results in right axis deviation and right ventricular hypertrophy. The heart size is usually normal on chest x-ray, although dilation of the main pulmonary artery may be seen. Echocardiography provides assessment of the site of stenosis, degree of hypertrophy, and valve morphology, as well as an estimate of the pressure gradient. Valvular pulmonary stenosis usually does not progress, especially if it is mild. Balloon valvuloplasty is usually successful in reducing the gradient to acceptable levels for more significant or symptomatic stenosis. Surgical repair is required if balloon valvuloplasty is unsuccessful or when subvalvular (muscular) stenosis is present. Valvular, subvalvular, or supravalvular aortic stenosis represents approximately 5% of all congenital heart disease. Lesions result from failure of development of the three leaflets or failure of resorption of tissue around the valve. Mild to moderate obstructions cause no symptoms. More severe stenosis results in easy fatigability, exertional chest pain, and syncope. Infants with critical aortic stenosis may present with symptoms of heart failure. A systolic ejection murmur is heard at the right second intercostal space along the sternum and radiating into the neck. The murmur increases in length and becomes higher in frequency as the degree of stenosis increases. With valvular stenosis, a systolic ejection click often is heard, and a thrill may be present at the right upper sternal border or in the suprasternal notch.
blood flow until surgery. Surgery is staged with an initial subclavian artery-to-pulmonary shunt (BlalockTaussig procedure)typically followed by a two-stage procedure: bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt (bidirectional Glenn) and Fontan procedure. These surgeries direct systemic venous return directly to the pulmonary arteries. Truncus arteriosus occurs in less than 1% of all cases of congenital heart disease (Fig. 144-4). It results from the failure of septation of the truncus during the first 3 to 4 weeks of gestation. A single arterial trunk arises from the heart with a large VSD immediately below the truncal valve. The pulmonary arteries arise from the single arterial trunk either as a single vessel that divides or individually from the arterial trunk to the lungs. Varying degrees of cyanosis depend on the amount of pulmonary blood flow. If not diagnosed at birth, the infantmay develop signs of heart failure as pulmonary vascularresistance decreases. The signs then include tachypnea andcough. Peripheral pulses are usually bounding as a result ofthe diastolic runoff into the pulmonary arteries. A single S2 is due to the single valve. There may be a systolic ejection click, and there is often a systolic murmur at the left sternal border. ECG findings include combined ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomegaly.
Older children presenting with coarctation of the aorta are usually asymptomatic. There may be a history of leg discomfort with exercise, headache, or epistaxis. Decreasedor absent lower extremity pulses, hypertension (upperextremity), or a murmur may be present. The murmur istypically best heard in the left interscapular area of the back.If significant collaterals have developed, continuous murmurs may be heard throughout the chest. An abnormal aortic valve is present approximately 50% of the time, causing asystolic ejection click and systolic ejection murmur of aorticstenosis. The ECG and chest x-ray show evidence of right ventricular enlargement and hypertrophy in infantile coarctation with marked cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema. Echocardiography shows the site of coarctation and associated lesions. In older children, the ECG and chest x-ray usually show left ventricular hypertrophy and a mildly enlarged heart. Rib notching may also be seen in older children (>8 years of age) with large collaterals. Echocardiography shows the site and degree of coarctation, presence of left ventricular hypertrophy, and aortic valve morphology and function. Management of an infant presenting with cardiac decompensation includes intravenous infusion of prostaglandin E1 (chemically opens the ductus arteriosus), inotropic agents, diuretics, and other supportive care. Balloon angioplastyhas been done, especially in critically ill infants, but surgical repair of the coarctation is most commonly performed. Ballooning and stenting of older patients with coarctation has become more accepted as primary therapy, but surgical repair remains a common form of management. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Cyanotic congenital heart disease occurs when some of the systemic venous return crosses from the right side of the heart to the left and returns to the body without going through the lungs (righttoleft shunt). Cyanosis, the visible sign of this shunt, occurs when approximately 5 g/100 mL of reduced hemoglobin is present in systemic blood.
An atrial-level communication is required for systemic cardiac output and survival. The most important determinant of presentation is the presenceor absence of obstruction to the pulmonary venous drainage.Infants without obstruction have minimal cyanosis and may beasymptomatic. There is a hyperactive right ventricular impulse with a widely split S2 (owing to increased right ventricular volume) and a systolic ejection murmur at the left upper sternalborder. There is usually a mid-diastolic murmur at the lowerleft sternal border from the increased flow across the tricuspidvalve. Growth is relatively poor. Infants with obstruction present with cyanosis, marked tachypnea and dyspnea, and signs ofright-sided heart failure including hepatomegaly. The obstruction results in little, if any, increase in right ventricular volume,so there may be no murmur or changes in S2. For infants without obstruction, the ECG is consistent with right ventricular volume overload. Cardiomegaly with

Figure 144-6 Hypoplastic left side of the heart. AO, Aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. increased pulmonary blood flow is seen on chest x-ray. Infants with obstructed veins have right axis deviation and right ventricular hypertrophy on ECG. On chest x-ray, the heart is normal or mildly enlarged with varying degrees of pulmonary edema that can appear similar to hyaline membrane disease or pneumonia. Echocardiography shows the volume-overloaded right side of the heart, right-to-left atrial level shunting, and common pulmonary vein site of drainage and degree of obstruction. At surgery, the common pulmonary vein is opened into the left atrium, and there is ligation of any vein or channel that had been draining the common vein.
Accurately predicting acute Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144401/03/19   6:44 PM 1445PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-7Ranson’s prognostic signs of pancreatitisCriteria for acute pancreatitis not due to gallstonesAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >55 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >16,000/mm3 BUN elevation >5 mg/dL Blood glucose >200 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >350 IU/L Arterial PO2 <60 mmHg Serum AST >250 U/dL Base deficit >4 mEq/L  Estimated fluid sequestration >6 LCriteria for acute gallstone pancreatitisAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >70 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >18,000/mm3 BUN elevation >2 mg/dL Blood glucose >220 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >400 IU/L Base deficit >5 mEq/L Serum AST >250 U/dL Estimated fluid sequestration >4 LNote: Fewer than three positive criteria predict mild, uncomplicated disease, whereas more than six positive criteria predict severe disease with a mortality risk of 50%.Abbreviations: AST = aspartate transaminase; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; PO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; WBC = white blood cell count.Data from Ranson JHC. Etiological and prognostic factors in human acute pancreatitis: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 1982;77:633 and from Ranson JH, Rifkind KM, Roses DF, et al. Prognostic signs and the role of operative management in acute pancreatitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1974;139:69.pancreatitis severity is important in making triage decisions about whether a patient should be transferred to a tertiary hospital or an intensive care unit and in making decisions about fluid therapy and whether an ERCP is indicated, as well as other issues.65 There is a very long history of attempts to find prognostic or predictive markers that accurately stratify the risk, with the most widely used being the Ranson’s criteria (Table 33-7) or modified Glasgow criteria. Both use clinical and biochemical parameters scored over the first 48 hours of admission. When there are three or more positive criteria, the disease is considered “predicted severe.” There are many other approaches to predicting severity. At 24 hours after admission an APACHE II score of 8 or more or a serum C-reactive protein level of >150 mg/dL has a similar accuracy in predicting severity as Ranson’s criteria.66 The more recently proposed Bedside Index for Severity of Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP) is calculated from blood urea nitrogen (> 25 mg/dL), impaired mental status (GCS <15), presence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, age >60 years, and pleural effusion. Although it has the advantage of simplicity and can be performed within the first 24 hours of admission, it performed no better than other predictors.67 The presence of SIRS also has prognostic significance.68 There remains some controversy as to how important obesity is as a risk factor for severe and critical acute pancreatitis.69 Another approach has been taken in seeking to predict those with the “harmless acute pancreatitis score”70 using three factors that can be determined on admission: absence of rebound tenderness or guarding, normal hematocrit, and normal serum creatinine. The accuracy of this approach appears to be over 90% and triages most patients away from intensive care.Unfortunately, these and many other single and combined predictors of severity have an accuracy of around 70%66. This means that there is misclassification error of 30% that limits the value in predicting the severity of acute pancreatitis in indi-vidual patients. In the absence of any new biomarkers of pancre-atitis severity, making better use of existing predictors through sequencing tests, combining tests, or using artificial neural network methodologies has shown some promise.71 Scoring systems should augment clinical judgment, but not replace it.64 Over the first 2 to 3 days the clinician must be alert to patients with an elevated BUN or creatinine and/or persistent SIRS after adequate fluid resuscitation because these patients are at risk of developing severe acute pancreatitis.64Classification of SeverityAccurately classifying or staging acute pancreatitis severity is important for clinical decision-making, communication, and enrolment into trials. The wide spectrum of pancreatitis severity was not captured in the previous binary classifica-tions (mild or severe).
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-

Hill, 2005.) Address the underlying etiology. Administer O2 before initiating evaluation. If the patient is on a ventilator, ↑ O2 saturation by increasing FiO2, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), or the I/E ratio. Hypercapnic patients: ↑ minute ventilation. Acute respiratory failure with refractory hypoxemia, ↓lung compliance, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. The pathogenesis is thought to be endothelial injury. Common triggers include sepsis, pneumonia, aspiration, multiple blood transfusions, inhaled/ingested toxins, and trauma. Overall mortality is 30–40%. Presents with acute-onset (12–48 hours) tachypnea, dyspnea, and tachycardia +/− fever, cyanosis, labored breathing, diffuse high-pitched rales, and hypoxemia in the setting of one of the systemic infammatory causes or exposure. Additional fndings are as follows:

Phase 1 (acute injury): Normal physical exam; possible respiratory alkalosis. Phase 2 (6–48 hours): Hyperventilation, hypocapnia, widening A-a oxygen gradient. Phase 3: Acute respiratory failure, tachypnea, dyspnea, ↓ lung compliance, scattered rales, diffuse chest infltrates on CXR (see Figure 2.15-5). F IGU R E 2.1 5-5.
It also is clinically useful to differentiate the common causes of respiratory distress according to gestational age (Table 61-1). In addition to the specific therapy for the individual disorder, supportive care and evaluation of the infant with respiratory distress can be applied to all the problems mentioned earlier (Table 61-2). Blood gas monitoring and interpretation are key components of general respiratory care. Treatment of hypoxemia requires knowledge of normal values. In term infants, the arterial Pao2 level is 55 to 60 mm Hg at 30 minutes of life, 75 mm Hg at 4 hours, and 90 mm Hg at 24 hours. Preterm infants have lower values. Paco2 levels should be 35 to 40 mm Hg, and the pH should be 7.35 to 7.40. It is imperative that arterial blood gas analysis be performed in all infants with significant respiratory distress, whether or not cyanosis is perceived. Cyanosis becomes evident when there is 5 g of unsaturated hemoglobin; anemia may interfere with the perception of cyanosis. Jaundice also may interfere with the appearance of cyanosis. Capillary blood gas determinations are useful in determining blood pH and the Paco2 level but may result in falsely low blood Pao2 readings. Serial blood gas levels may be monitored by an indwelling arterial catheter placed in a peripheral artery or through the umbilical artery. Another method for monitoring blood gas levels is to combine capillary blood gas techniques with noninvasive methods used

Primary pulmonary hypertension of the neonate* Meconium aspiration pneumonia* Polycythemia Amniotic fluid aspiration

Bacterial sepsis (GBS)* Transient tachypnea* Spontaneous pneumothorax Congenital anomalies (e.g., congenital lobar emphysema, cystic adenomatoid malformation, diaphragmatic hernia) Congenital heart disease Pulmonary hypoplasia Viral infection (e.g., herpes simplex, CMV) Inborn metabolic errors

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; GBS, group B streptococcus. *Common. Chest radiograph To determine reticular granular pattern of RDS; to determine presence of pneumothorax, cardiomegaly, life-threatening congenital anomalies

Arterial blood gas To determine severity of respiratory compromise, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia and type of acidosis; severity determines treatment strategy

Complete blood count Hemoglobin/hematocrit to determine anemia and polycythemia; white blood cell count to determine neutropenia/ sepsis; platelet count and smear to determine DIC

Blood glucose To determine presence of hypoglycemia, which may produce or occur simultaneously with respiratory distress; to determine stress hyperglycemia

Echocardiogram, ECG In the presence of a murmur, cardiomegaly, or refractory hypoxia; to determine structural heart disease or PPHN

DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; ECG, electrocardiogram; PPHN, primary pulmonary hypertension of the newborn; RDS, respiratory distress syndrome.
ventilation may also be used to reverse regional atelectasis. This form results from hypoperfusion of respiratory muscles in patients in shock. Normally, respiratory muscles consume <5% of total cardiac output and oxygen delivery. Patients in shock often experience respiratory distress due to pulmonary edema (e.g., in cardiogenic shock), lactic acidosis, and anemia. In this setting, up to 40% of cardiac output may be distributed to the respiratory muscles. Intubation and mechanical ventilation can allow redistribution of the cardiac output away from the respiratory muscles and back to vital organs while the shock is treated. (See also Chap. 323) Whereas a thorough understanding of the pathophysiology of respiratory failure is essential for optimal patient care, recognition of a patient’s readiness to be liberated from mechanical ventilation is likewise important. Several studies have shown that daily spontaneous breathing trials can identify patients who are ready for extubation. Accordingly, all intubated, mechanically ventilated patients should undergo daily screening of respiratory function. If oxygenation is stable (i.e., PaO2/FIO2 [partial pressure of oxygen/fraction of inspired oxygen] >200 and PEEP ≤5 cmH2O), cough and airway reflexes are intact, and no vasopressor agents or sedatives are being administered, the patient has passed the screening test and should undergo a spontaneous breathing trial. This trial consists of a period of breathing through the endotracheal tube without ventilator support (both continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] of 5 cmH2O and an open T-piece breathing system can be used) for 30–120 min. The spontaneous breathing trial is declared a failure and stopped if any of the following occur: (1) respiratory rate >35/min for >5 min, (2) O2 saturation <90%, (3) heart rate >140/min or a 20% increase or decrease from baseline, (4) systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or >180 mmHg, or (5) increased anxiety or diaphoresis. If, at the end of the spontaneous breathing trial, none of the above events has occurred and the ratio of the respiratory rate and tidal volume in liters (f/VT) is <105, the patient can be extubated. Such protocol-driven approaches to patient care can have an important impact on the duration of mechanical ventilation and ICU stay.
Temperature, pulse, respiration, blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, and state of consciousness should be checked and charted every hour. The Glasgow Coma Scale, mentioned earlier, has provided a practical means by which the state of impaired consciousness can be evaluated at frequent intervals (see Table 34-1), but it should not be considered a substitute for a more complete neurologic examination. CT and MRI scanning of the cranium have assumed central importance at this juncture. A sizable epidural, subdural, or intracerebral blood clot is an indication for immediate surgery. The presence of contusions, brain edema, and displacement of central structures calls for measures to monitor progression of these lesions and to control ICP. These measures are best carried out in a critical care unit. Management of Raised Intracranial Pressure

There has been a presumption, not unreasonable, that high levels of ICP are deleterious after head injury, much as it is in other processes that involve an intracranial mass. At issue has been the precise pressure at which damage occurs, whether lowering ICP improves outcome, which treatments are best, and the role of monitoring in guiding treatment. Certainly there are many biologic processes in neurons and astrocytes that greatly influence outcome after traumatic brain injury, many set in motion at the time of impact and not referable to raised ICP. At times, these overwhelm the changes induced by ICP but they are not particularly remediable, producing an emphasis on reducing ICP as a means of preventing secondary brain damage. An approach to ICP treatment is given here and also addressed in Chap. 16 on coma and Chap. 30 on brain tumors. ICP monitoring In cases of moderate and severe head injury it has been the practice on most ICU services to insert one of several available devices that continuously record ICP. The rationale is ostensibly to gain control over a remediable cause of secondary brain damage, particularly if the patient’s neurologic examination is reduced to a few sentinel signs such as pupillary enlargement or because sedating medications have obscured the examination.
7-11). RT is best accomplished using a generous left anterolateral thoracotomy, with the skin incision started to the right of the sternum (Fig. 7-12). A longitudinal peri-cardiotomy anterior to the phrenic nerve is used to release cardiac tamponade and permits access to the heart for cardiac repair and open cardiac massage. The cardiac wound should be repaired prior to vigorous efforts of myocardial resuscitation (e.g., epinephrine, calcium). Cross-clamping of the aorta improves central circula-tion, augments cerebral and coronary blood flow, and limits further abdominal blood loss (Fig. 7-13). The patient must sustain a SBP of 70 mmHg after RT and associated interventions to be considered resuscitable, and hence transported to the OR.18,19Disability and Exposure. The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score should be determined for all injured patients (Table 7-3). It is calculated by adding the scores of the best motor response, best verbal response, and the best eye response. Scores range from 3 (the lowest) to 15 (normal). Scores of 13 to 15 indicate mild head injury, 9 to 12 moderate injury, and ≤8 severe injury. The GCS is a quantifiable determination of neurologic function that is useful for triage, treatment, and prognosis.Neurologic evaluation, including spinal cord integrity, is critical before administration of neuromuscular blockade for intubation. Subtle changes in mental status can be caused by hypoxia, hypercarbia, or hypovolemia, or may be an early sign of increasing intracranial pressure. An abnormal mental status should prompt an immediate reevaluation of the patient’s ABCs and consideration of central nervous system injury.
The most successful approaches to preventing injury have combined strategies (education, environmental changes, and engineering changes focused on the host, agent, and environment in all three time phases). The general goal of prehospital trauma care is rapid assessment, support of the ABCs, immobilization, and transportation. Outcomes of patients with major or life-threatening trauma are significantly improved in a pediatric trauma center or in an adult center with pediatric trauma certification compared with level I or II adult trauma centers. Once the injured child arrives at the emergency department, the trauma team must initiate an organized and synchronized response. The initial assessment of a seriously injured child should involve a systematic approach, including a primary survey, resuscitation, secondary survey, postresuscitation monitoring, and definitive care. The primary survey focuses on the ABCDEs of emergency care, as modified for trauma from the ABCs of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (see Chapter 38). The assessment of the airway and breathing components should include meticulous control of the cervical spine (especially if the patient has an altered mental status), evaluation for anatomic injuries that could impair air entry or gas exchange, and consideration of the likelihood of a full stomach (risk of aspiration pneumonia). Circulation can be assessed via observation (heart rate, skin color, mental status) and palpation (pulse quality, capillary refill, skin temperature) and restored (via two large peripheral intravenous lines, when possible) while control of bleeding is accomplished through the use of direct pressure. Assessment for disabilities (D),including neurologic status, includes examination of pupil size and reactivity, a brief mental status assessment (AVPU—alert; responds to voice; responds to pain; unresponsive), and examination of extremity movement to assess for spinal cord injury. The Glasgow Coma Scale can direct decisions regarding the initiation of cerebral resuscitation in patients with suspected closed head injuries (Table 42-1). E, which stands for exposure,requires a full assessment of the patient by completely disrobing the child for a detailed examination of the entire body. The examiner should ensure a neutral thermal environment to prevent hypothermia. On completion of the primary survey, a more detailed headto-toe examination (the secondary survey) should ensue along with efforts to obtain a more complete history. The purpose of this careful re-examination is to identify life-threatening and limb-threatening injuries as well as less serious injuries. Coincident with the secondary survey and depending, in part, on the assessed physiologic status of the patient, certain procedures and resuscitative measures are initiated.
Isotonic ﬂuids (LR or NS) are repleted in a 3:1 ratio (ﬂuid to blood loss). Start with a ﬂuid bolus of 1–2 L in adults; then recheck vitals and continue repletion as indicated. If the patient remains tachycardic or hypotensive after the first 2 L of isotonic ﬂuid, transfusion with packed RBCs may be indicated. To remember the Glasgow Coma Scale, think 4-eyes, Jackson-5, V6 engine. Four points can be assigned for eye response, five points for verbal response, and six points for motor response. Patients with chest trauma and shock may have cardiac tamponade. The relevant signs are JVD, hypotension, and mufﬂed heart sounds. This can be diagnosed with bedside ultrasound. If tamponade is diagnosed, an immediate pericardiocentesis is necessary. Disability/Exposure:

Disability (CNS dysfunction) is assessed and quantified with the GCS. Exposure requires that the patient be completely disrobed and assessed for injury and temperature status on both the front and back of the body. Hypothermia is a common problem in trauma and can worsen bleeding; once the exam is done, the patient should be covered with warm blankets. Once the patient is stable, conduct a full examination. For unstable patients with suspected hemoperitoneum or tamponade, do a focused abdominal sonography for trauma (FAST) scan. Four spaces are checked for blood: between the right kidney and liver (Morrison’s pouch), between the left kidney and spleen (the splenorenal recess), posterior to the bladder (the pouch of Douglas), and in the pericardium.
In the hospital, the first step is to clear the airway and ensure adequate ventilation by endotracheal intubation if necessary. A search for other injuries must be made, particularly of the abdomen, chest, spine, and long bones. Chesnut et al (2012), in analyzing the data from the Traumatic Coma Data Bank, found that sustained early hypotension (systolic blood pressure <90 mm Hg) was associated with a doubling of mortality. If shock was present on admission to the emergency ward, the mortality was 65 percent. Although the hypotension that follows most injuries is a vasodepressor response and usually comes under control within approximately 1 h without pressor drugs, a large, unimpeded intravenous line should be inserted. Persistent hypotension because of head injury alone is an uncommon occurrence and should always raise the suspicion of thoracic or abdominal internal bleeding, extensive fractures, or trauma to the cervical cord, or diabetes insipidus. Initially, the infused fluid should be normal saline, avoiding the administration of excessive “free water” because of its adverse effect on brain edema. Oxygen should continue to be administered until it can be shown that the arterial oxygen saturation is normal. A rapid neurologic survey can then be made, with attention to the depth of coma, size of the pupils and their reaction to light, ocular movements, corneal reflexes, facial movements during grimace, swallowing, vocalization, gag reflexes, muscle tone and movements of the limbs, predominant postures, reactions to pinch, and reflexes. Bogginess of the temporal or postauricular area (Battle sign), bleeding from the nose or ear, and extensive conjunctival edema and hemorrhage are useful signs of an underlying basal skull fracture. However, it should be remembered that rupture of an eardrum or a blow to the nose may also cause bleeding from these parts. Fracture of the orbital bones may displace the eye, with resulting strabismus; fracture of the jaw results in malocclusion and discomfort on attempting to open the mouth. If urine is retained and the bladder is distended, a catheter should be inserted and kept there. Temperature, pulse, respiration, blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, and state of consciousness should be checked and charted every hour. The Glasgow Coma Scale, mentioned earlier, has provided a practical means by which the state of impaired consciousness can be evaluated at frequent intervals (see Table 34-1), but it should not be considered a substitute for a more complete neurologic examination.
In some patients, cirrhosis with liver failure or bleeding varices may be the presenting inding. Indeed, asymptomatic chronic viral hepatitis as a group remains the leading cause of liver cancer and the most frequent reason for liver transplantation. Chronic viral hepatitis is usually diagnosed serologically (Table 55-3). With persistently abnormal biochemical tests, liver biopsy usually discloses active inlammation, continuing necrosis, and fibrosis that may lead to cirrhosis. Chronic hepatitis is classiied by cause; by grade, defined by histological activity; and by stage, which is the degree of progression (Dienstag, 2015b). Most young women with chronic viral hepatitis either are asymptomatic or have only mild liver disease. For seropositive asymptomatic women, there usually are no problems with pregnancy. With symptomatic chronic active hepatitis, pregnancy outcome depends primarily on disease and ibrosis severity, and especially on the presence of portal hypertension. he few women whom we have managed have done well, but their long-term prognosis is poor. Accordingly, they should be counseled regarding possible liver transplantation as well as abortion and sterilization options. Vaccination has reduced the incidence of hepatitis by 95 percent since 1995. In 2014, the rate was 0.4 per 100,000 individuals (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016b). his 27-nm RNA picornavirus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, usually by ingestion of contaminated food or water. The incubation period is approximately 4 weeks. Individuals shed virus in their feces, and during the relatively brief period of viremia, their blood is also infectious.
Hepatorenal syndrome: A diagnosis of exclusion; difficult to treat and often requires dialysis. Hepatic encephalopathy:

Due to ↓ clearance of ammonia. Often precipitated by dehydration, infection, electrolyte abnormalities, and GI bleeding. Treat with dietary protein restriction, lactulose, and rifaximin. Esophageal varices:

Monitor for GI bleeding; treat medically (β-blockers, octreotide), endoscopically (band ligation), or surgically (portocaval shunt). Consider liver transplantation for patients with advanced disease. An autoimmune disorder characterized by destruction of intrahepatic bile ducts. The disease most commonly presents in middle-aged women with other autoimmune conditions. Hx/PE: Presents with progressive jaundice, pruritus, and malabsorption of the fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K). Dx: Laboratory findings include ↑ alkaline phosphatase, ↑ bilirubin, antimitochondrial antibody, and ↑ cholesterol. Tx: Ursodeoxycholic acid (slows progression of disease); cholestyramine for pruritus; liver transplantation. One of the most common cancers worldwide despite its relatively low incidence in the United States. 1° risk factors for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma in the United States are cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis (HCV). In developing countries, af atoxins (in various food sources) and HBV infection are also major risk factors. Patients commonly present with RUQ tenderness, abdominal distention, and signs of chronic liver disease such as jaundice, easy bruisability, and coagulopathy.
In the past, appendicitis with rupture and subsequent spread of infection was the most common source for a liver abscess. Currently, associated disease of the biliary tract is most common. Pylephlebitis (suppurative thrombosis of the portal vein), usually arising from infection in the pelvis but sometimes from infection elsewhere in the peritoneal cavity, is another common source for bacterial seeding of the liver. Fever is the most common presenting sign of liver abscess. Some patients, particularly those with associated disease of the biliary tract, have symptoms and signs localized to the right upper quadrant, including pain, guarding, punch tenderness, and even rebound tenderness. Nonspecific symptoms, such as chills, anorexia, weight loss, nausea, and vomiting, may also develop. Only 50% of patients with liver abscesses, however, have hepatomegaly, right-upper-quadrant tenderness, or jaundice; thus, one-half of patients have no symptoms or signs to direct attention to the liver. Fever of unknown origin may be the only manifestation of liver abscess, especially in the elderly. Diagnostic studies of the abdomen, especially the right upper quadrant, should be a part of any workup for fever of unknown origin. The single most reliable laboratory finding is an elevated serum concentration of alkaline phosphatase, which is documented in 70% of patients with liver abscesses. Other tests of liver function may yield normal results, but 50% of patients have elevated serum levels of bilirubin, and 48% have elevated concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase. Other laboratory findings include leukocytosis in 77% of patients, anemia (usually normochromic, normocytic) in 50%, and hypoalbuminemia in 33%. Concomitant bacteremia is found in one-third to one-half of patients. A liver abscess is sometimes suggested by chest radiography, especially if a new elevation of the right hemidiaphragm is seen; other suggestive findings include a right basilar infiltrate and a right pleural effusion. Imaging studies are the most reliable methods for diagnosing liver abscesses.
Patients with cirrhosis may have an enlarged left lobe of the liver, which is felt below the xiphoid, and an enlarged spleen. A grossly enlarged nodular liver or an obvious abdominal mass suggests malignancy. An enlarged tender liver could signify viral or alcoholic hepatitis; an infiltrative process such as amyloidosis; or, less often, an acutely congested liver secondary to right-sided heart failure. Severe right-upper-quadrant tenderness with respiratory arrest on inspiration (Murphy’s sign) suggests cholecystitis. Ascites in the presence of jaundice suggests either cirrhosis or malignancy with peritoneal spread. Laboratory Tests A battery of tests are helpful in the initial evaluation of a patient with unexplained jaundice. These include total and direct serum bilirubin measurement with fractionation; determination of serum aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin concentrations; and prothrombin time tests. Enzyme tests (alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST], and alkaline phosphatase [ALP]) are helpful in differentiating between a hepatocellular process and a cholestatic process (Table 358-1; Fig. 58-1)—a critical step in determining what additional workup is indicated. Patients with a hepatocellular process generally have a rise in the aminotransferases that is disproportionate to that in ALP, whereas patients with a cholestatic process have a rise in ALP that is disproportionate to that of the aminotransferases. The serum bilirubin can be prominently elevated in both hepatocellular and cholestatic conditions and therefore is not necessarily helpful in differentiating between the two. In addition to enzyme tests, all jaundiced patients should have additional blood tests—specifically, an albumin level and a prothrombin time—to assess liver function. A low albumin level suggests a chronic process such as cirrhosis or cancer. A normal albumin level is suggestive of a more acute process such as viral hepatitis or choledocholithiasis. An elevated prothrombin time indicates either vitamin K deficiency due to prolonged jaundice and malabsorption of vitamin K or significant hepatocellular dysfunction.
N Engl J Med 356: 14, 2007

Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al: Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update. Clinical practice guideline. 2008. Available at: http://ww. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK63952/. Accessed September 19, 2016

Fleming N, O'Driscoll T, Becker G, et al: Adolescent pregnancy guidelines. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(8):740,e2015

Foster M, Herulah UNPrasad A, et al: Zinc status of vegetarians during pregnancy: a systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis of zinc intake. Nutrients 7(6):4512, 2015

Giglio JA, Lanni SM, Laskin OM, et al: Oral health care for the pregnant patient. J Can Dent 5(1):43, 2009

Green PP, McKnight-Eily LR, Tan CH, et al: Vital signs: alcohol-exposed pregnancies-United States, 201e1-2013. MMWR 65(4):91,e2016

Gregory KD, Johnson CT, Johnson TR, et al: The content of prenatal care. Women's Health Issues 16:198,e2006

Grenache DG: Variable accuracy of home pregnancy tests: truth in advertising? Clin Chen Lab Med 53(3):339, 2015

Grudzinskas JG, Watson C, Chard T: Does sexual intercourse cause fetal distress? Lancet 2:692, 1979

Gutke A, Betten C, Degerskar K, et al: Treatments for pregnancy-related lumbopelvic pain: a systematic review of physiotherapy modalities. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(1e1): 1156, 2015

Haragan AF, Hulsey TC, Hawk AF, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of fundal height and handheld ultrasound-measured abdominal circumference to screen for fetal growth abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):820. e1,e2015

Healy CM, Rench A, Baker CJ: Importance of timing of maternal combined tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) immunization and protection of young infants.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
Neurology 28:928, 1978. Chimowitz MI, Lynn MJ, Derdyn CP, et al, for the SAMMPRIS Trial investigators. Stenting versus aggressive medical therapy for intracranial arterial stenosis. N Engl J Med 365:993, 2011. Chimowitz MI, Lynn MJ, Howlett-Smith H, et al: Comparison of warfarin and aspirin for symptomatic intracranial arterial stenosis. N Engl J Med 352:1305, 2005. Churg J, Strauss L: Allergic granulomatosis, allergic angiitis and periarteritis nodosa. Am J Pathol 27:277, 1951. Claassen J, Jetté N, Chum R, et al: Electrographic seizures and periodic discharges after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology 69:1356, 2007. Cogan DG: Visual hallucinations as release phenomena. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 188:139, 1973. Collins R, Peto R, MacMahon S, et al: Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Lancet 335:827, 1990. Connor MD, Lammie GA, Bell JE, et al: Cerebral infarction in adults AIDS patients.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
JAMA 2016;315:2424. Pi-Sunyer X et al: A randomized, controlled trial of 3.0 mg of liralutide in weight management. N Engl J Med 2015;373:11. Skinner AC et al: Cardiometabolic risks and severity of obesity in children and young adults. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1307.

termed scombroid poisoning (Scombridae family of fish is most commonly associated with this toxicity). Treatment with maximal doses of histamine blockers, especially H1 blockers, is usually sufficient to control the symptoms. Because this is not an allergic reaction, administration of epinephrine is not necessary unless hypotension or airway obstruction is severe. (See Edlow JA: The Deadly Dinner Party: And Other Medical Detective Stories. Yale University Press, 2009.) These patients demonstrate typical symptoms and signs caused by histamine. Fortunately, neither patient in this episode of food poisoning had significant laryngeal edema or bronchospasm. Certain types of fish, if improperly preserved, contain large quantities of histamine, due to the conversion—by bacteria contaminating the muscle tissue—of histidine to histamine. If consumed in suf-ficient amount, enough histamine can be absorbed to cause the clinical picture described. This syndrome is

Ian A. Reid, PhD

During a routine check and on two follow-up visits, a 45-year-old man was found to have high blood pressure (160–165/95–100 mm Hg). His physician initially prescribed hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic commonly used to treat hyper-tension.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
348-3). Physiology of Gastric Secretion Hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen are the two principal gastric secretory products capable of inducing mucosal injury. Gastric acid and pepsinogen play a physiologic role in protein digestion; absorption of iron, calcium, magnesium, and vitamin B12; and killing ingested bacteria. Acid secretion should be viewed as occurring under basal and stimulated conditions. Basal acid production occurs in a circadian pattern, with highest levels occurring during the night and lowest levels during the morning hours. Cholinergic input via the vagus nerve and histaminergic input from local gastric sources are the principal contributors to basal acid secretion. Stimulated gastric acid secretion occurs primarily in three phases based on the site where the signal originates (cephalic, gastric, and intestinal). Sight, smell, and taste of food are the components of the cephalic phase, which stimulates gastric secretion via the vagus nerve. The gastric phase is activated once food enters the stomach. This component of secretion is driven by nutrients (amino acids and amines) that directly stimulate the G cell to release gastrin, which in turn activates the parietal cell via direct and indirect mechanisms. Distention of the stomach wall also leads to gastrin release and acid production. The last phase of gastric acid secretion is initiated as food enters the intestine and is mediated by luminal distention and nutrient assimilation. A series of pathways that inhibit gastric acid production are also set into motion during these phases. The GI hormone somatostatin is released from endocrine cells found in the gastric mucosa (D cells) in response to HCl. Somatostatin can inhibit acid production by both direct (parietal cell) and indirect mechanisms (decreased histamine release from ECL cells and gastrin release from G cells).
Norlén P, Ericsson P, Kitano M, Ekelund M, Håkanson R. The vagus regulates histamine mobilization from rat stomach ECL cells by controlling their sensitivity to gastrin. J Physiol. 2005;564(pt 3):895-905. 31. Holst JJ, Knuhtsen S, Orskov C, et al. GRP nerves in pig antrum: role of GRP in vagal control of gastrin secretion. Am J Physiol. 1987;253(5 pt 1):G643-G649. 32. Helgadottir H, Metz DC, Yang YX, Rhim AD, Björnsson ES. The effects of long-term therapy with proton pump inhibitors on meal stimulated gastrin. Dig Liver Dis. 2014;46(2):125-130. 33. Lodrup AB, Reimer C, Bytzer P. Systematic review: symptoms of rebound acid hypersecretion following proton pump inhibi-tor treatment.
Lloyd KCK, Debas HT. Hormonal and neural regulation of gastric acid secretion. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. 3rd ed. New York: Raven; 1993. 29. Del Valle J, Todisco A. Gastric secretion. In: Yamada T, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2003:266. 30. Norlén P, Ericsson P, Kitano M, Ekelund M, Håkanson R. The vagus regulates histamine mobilization from rat stomach ECL cells by controlling their sensitivity to gastrin. J Physiol.
These peptides inhibit endocrine and exocrine secretion and affect neurotransmission, GI and biliary motility, intestinal absorption, vascular tone, and cell proliferation.Five different somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) have been cloned and the biologic properties of each are different.9 The hexapeptide and octapeptide analogues such as octreotide bind only to SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5. These analogues have a longer serum half-life, and their potent inhibitory effect has been used clinically to treat both endocrine and exocrine disor-ders. For example, octreotide has been shown to decrease fistula output and speed the time it takes for enteric and pancreatic fistulas to close.10Endocrine release of somatostatin occurs during a meal. The major stimulant is probably intraluminal fat. Acidification of the gastric and duodenal mucosa also releases somatostatin in isolated perfused organ preparations. Acetylcholine from the cholinergic neurons inhibits somatostatin release.Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) is a 36-amino-acid, straight-chain peptide discovered by Kimmel in 1968 during the process of insulin purification. Protein is the most potent enteral stimu-lator of PP release, closely followed by fat, whereas glucose has a weaker effect.11 Hypoglycemia, whether or not it is insulin induced, strongly stimulates PP secretion through cholinergic stimulation.12 Phenylalanine, tryptophan, and fatty acids in the duodenum stimulate PP release, probably by inducing CCK, GIP, and secretin release. Vagal stimulation of the pancreas is the most important regulator of PP secretion. In fact, vagotomy eliminates the rise in PP levels usually seen after a meal. This can be used as a test for the completeness of a surgical vagot-omy or for the presence of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.PP has been shown to inhibit choleresis (bile secretion), gallbladder contraction, and secretion by the exocrine pan-creas. However, PP’s most important role is in glucose regu-lation through its regulation of hepatic insulin receptor gene expression. A deficiency in PP secretion due to proximal pan-createctomy, severe chronic pancreatitis, or cystic fibrosis, is associated with diminished hepatic insulin sensitivity due to reduced hepatic insulin receptor availability.13 This effect is reversed by PP administration.14Recent studies have shown that a fifth islet peptide, ghre-lin, is secreted from a distinct population of islet cells, called epsilon cells.15,16 Ghrelin also is present in the gastric fundus in large amounts and stimulates growth hormone secretion via growth hormone releasing hormone release from the pituitary. It is an orexigenic, or appetite-stimulating, peptide the plasma levels of which are increased in obesity. Ghrelin has also been shown to block insulin effects on the liver, and inhibits the beta-cell response to incretin hormones and glucose.17 Therefore, ghrelin secretion from and within the islet may modulate the responses of other islet cells to nutrient and hormonal stimuli.In addition to the five main peptides secreted by the pan-creas, there are a number of other peptide products of the islet cells, including amylin, peptide YY (PYY), and pancreastatin, as well as neuropeptides such as VIP, galanin, and serotonin. Amylin or islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) is a 37-amino-acid polypeptide that is predominantly expressed by the pancreatic beta-cells, where it is stored along with insulin in secretory granules.18 The function of IAPP seems to be the modulation or counterregulation of insulin secretion and function.
Other functions are listed in

Box 29.1

Food entering the stomach from the esophagus causes mechanical stimulation of the gastric wall via distention and stretching of smooth muscle. Food—predominantly oligopeptides and amino acids—also provides chemical stimulation when present in the gastric lumen. Regulation of gastric function during the gastric phase is dependent on endocrine, paracrine, and neural pathways. These pathways are activated by mechanical and chemical stimuli, which result in intrinsic and extrinsic neural reflex pathways that are important for regulation of gastric function. Afferent neurons that pass from the GI tract to the central nervous system (and to a lesser extent to the spinal cord) via the vagus nerve respond to these mechanical and chemical stimuli and activate parasympathetic outflow. The endocrine pathways include the release of gastrin, which stimulates gastric acid secretion, and the release of somatostatin, which inhibits gastric secretion. Important paracrine pathways include histamine release, which stimulates gastric acid secretion. The responses elicited by activation of these pathways include both secretory and motor responses; secretory responses include secretion of acid, pepsinogen, mucus, intrinsic factor, gastrin, lipase, and HCO3 − . Overall these secretions initiate protein digestion and protect the gastric mucosa. Motor responses (changes in activity of smooth muscle) include inhibition of motility of the proximal part of the stomach (receptive relaxation) and stimulation of motility of the distal part of the stomach, which causes antral peristalsis. These changes in motility play important roles in storage and mixing of the meal with secretions and are also involved in regulating the flow of contents out of the stomach. Functional Anatomy of the Stomach

The stomach is divided into three regions: the cardia, the corpus (also referred to as the fundus or body), and the antrum (

Fig. 29.1 ). However, when discussing the physiology of the stomach, it is helpful to think of it as subdivided into two functional regions: the proximal and distal parts of the stomach. The proximal portion of the stomach (called proximal because it is the most cranial) and the distal portion of the stomach (furthest away from the mouth) have quite different functions in the postprandial response to a meal, which will be discussed later.
Muscular relaxation of the colon is accompanied by increased absorption of water and sodium that predisposes to consti pation. This complaint is reported by almost 40 percent of women at some time during pregnancy (Everson, 1992). Such symptoms are usually only mildly bothersome, and preventive measures include a high-iber diet and bulk-forming lxatives. Wald (2003) has reviewed treatment options. We have encoun impacted stool. These women almost invariably had chronically abused stimulatory laxatives. he estimated monthly prevalence of diarrhea among adults is 3 to 7 percent (DuPont, 2014). Diarrhea can be classiied as acute «2 weeks), persistent (2 to 4 weeks), and chronic (>4 weeks). Most cases of acute diarrhea are caused by infectious agents, and a third result from foodborne pathogens. The large variety of viruses, bacteria, helminths, and protozoa that cause diarrhea in adults inevitably also alict pregnant women. Some of these are discussed in Chapter 64. Evaluation of acute diarrhea depends on its severity and duration. Some indications for evaluation include profuse watery diarrhea with dehydration, grossly bloody stools, fevera> 38°C, duration >48 hours without improvement, recent antimicrobial use, and diarrhea in the immunocompromised patient (Camilleri, 2015; DuPont, 2014). Cases of moderately severe diarrhea with fecal leukocytes or gross blood may best be treated with empirical antibiotics rather than evaluation. Some features of the more common acute diarrheal syndromes and their treatment are shown in Table 54-4.
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
Monitor the patient’s hematocrit and BP and treat with IV hydration, transfusion, IV PPIs, endoscopy, and surgery as needed for complications. If perforation is likely, emergent surgery is indicated. Pharmacologic:

Involves protecting the mucosa, decreasing acid production, and eradicating H. pylori infection. Treat mild disease with antacids or with sucralfate, bismuth, and misoprostol (a prostaglandin analog) for mucosal protection. PPIs or H2 receptor antagonists may be used to ↓ acid secretion. Patients with confirmed H. pylori infection should receive triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole). Discontinue use of exacerbating agents. Patients with recurrent or severe disease may require chronic symptomatic therapy. Endoscopy and surgery:

Patients with symptomatic gastric ulcers for > 2 months that are refractory to medical therapy should have either endoscopy or an upper GI series with barium to rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. Refractory cases may require a surgical procedure such as parietal cell vagotomy (the most selective and preferred surgical approach). Hemorrhage (posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduodenal artery), gastric outlet obstruction, perforation (usually anterior ulcers), intractable pain. ■A rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duodenum and/or pancreas that lead to oversecretion of gastrin. ■↑ gastrin results in the production of high levels of gastric acid by the gastric mucosa, leading to recurrent/intractable ulcers in the stomach and duodenum (may occur more distally). In 20% of cases, gastrinomas are associated with MEN 1 (pancreas, pituitary, and parathyroid tumors). Hx/PE: Patients may present with unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain as well as with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, and GI bleeding.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
Postgrad Med ] 77:21 ,2001 De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE: Hyperthyroidism. Lancet 388(10047):906, 2016

Dias M, Boquszewski C, Gadelha M, et al: Acromegaly and pregnancy: a prospective study. Eur J EndocrinoIt170(2):301, 2013

Diez J], Iglesias P: Spontaneous subclinical hypothyroidism in patients older than 55 years: an analysis of natural course and risk factors for the development of overt thyroid failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:4890, 2004

Dong 0, Li H: Diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2 (18):1930,t2014

Eschler DC, Kogekar N, Pessah-Pollack R: Management of adrenal tumors in pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 44(2):381,t2015

Fadel BM, Ellahham S, Ringel MD, et al: Hyperthyroid heart disease. Clin Cardiol 23:402, 2000

Fagin JA, Wells SA Jr: Biologic and clinical perspectives on thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med 375(11):1054,t2016

Feigenberg T, Ben-Shushan A, Daka K, et al: Ultrasound-diagnosed puerperal osteopenia in young primiparas. J Reprod Med 53(4):287, 2008

Feinberg EC, Molitch ME, Endres LK, et al: The incidence of Sheehan's syndrome after obstetric hemorrhage. Fertil Steril 84:975, 2005

Fisher DA: Fetal thyroid function: diagnosis and management of fetal thyroid disorders. Clin Obstet Gynecol 40: 16, 1997

Fitzpatrick DL, Russell MA: Diagnosis and management of thyroid disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 37(2): 173,t2010

Fleseriu M: Medical treatment of acromegaly in pregnancy, highlights on new reports. Endocrine 49(3):577,t2015 Foyouzi N: Lymphocytic adenohypophysitis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 66(2): 109, 201t1

Galambosi P, Hilsemaa V, Ulander VM, et al: Prolonged low-molecularweight heparin use during pregnancy and subsequent bone mineral density. Thromb Res 143:122,t2016

Gallagher MP, Schachner HC, Levine LS, et al: Neonatal thyroid enlargement associated with propylthiouracil therapy of Graves' diseases during pregnancy: a problem revisited.
Hypertens 32(7):1458, 2014

Salvatori R: Adrenal insuiciency. ]AMA 294:2481, 2005

Sarathi V, Lila A, Bandgar T, et al: Pheochromocytoma and pregnancy: a rare but dangerous combination. Endocr Pract 16(2):300,t2010

Sarkhail P, Mehran L, Askari S, et al: Maternal thyroid function and autoimmunity in 3 trimesters of pregnancy and their ofspring's thyroid function. Horm Metab Res 48:20,t2016

Schlechte ]A: Long-term management of prolactinomas. ] Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:2861, 2007

Schnatz PF, haxton S: Parathyroidectomy in the third trimester of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 60:672, 2005

Schneiderman M, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancies in women with Addison's disease: a populationbased cohort study on 7.7 millions births. B]OG 124:1772,t2017

Scoccia B, Demir H, Kang Y, et al: In viro fertilization pregnancy rates in levothyroxine-treated women with hypothyroidism compared to women without thyroid dysfunction disorders. TIlyroid 22(6):631, 2012

Sheehan HL: Post-partum necrosis of the anterior pituitary. ] Pathol Bacteriol 45:189, 1937

Sheehan PM, Nankervis A, Araujo ]linior E, et al: Maternal thyroid disease and preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analysis. ] Clin Endocrinol Metab 100(11):4325, 2015

Sheield ]S, Cunningham FG: Thyrotoxicosis and heart failure that complicate pregnancy, Am ] Obstet Gynecol 190:211, 2004

Shoback 0: Hypoparathyroidism. N Engl] Med 359:391, 2008

Siu CW, Zhang XH, Yung C, et al: Hemodynamic changes in hyperthyroidismrelated pulmonary hypertension: a prospective echocardiographic study. ] Clin Endocrinol Metab 92: 1736, 2007

Song SI, Daneman D, Rovet]: he inluence of etiology and treatment factors on intellectual outcome in congenital hypothyroidism. ] Dev Behav Pediatr 6,t2001

Stagnaro-Green A: Maternal thyroid disease and preterm delivery.t] Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:21, 2009

Stagnaro-Green A: Overt hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism during pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(3):478, 2011a

Stagnaro-Green A, Glinoer 0: Thyroid autoimmunity and the risk of miscarriage. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 18: , 2004 Stagnaro-Green A, Pearce E: hyroid disorders in pregnancy.
Traditionally, fetal blood sampling, described in Chapter 14 (p. 294), is preferred to amniocentesis for guiding treatment, although data are limited (Abuhamad, 1995; Ribault, 2009). Goals of therapy are correction of the physiological abnormality and diminished goiter size. The goiter may compress the trachea and esophagus to such a degree that severe hydramnios or neonatal airway compromise may develop. Hyperextension of the fetal neck by a goiter can create labor dystocia. Untreated fetal thyrotoxicosis may present with goiter, tachycardia, growth restriction, hydramnios, accelerated bone maturation, and even heart failure and hydrops (Huel, 2009; Peleg, 2002). The cause is usually maternal Graves disease with transplacental passage ofIgG thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins. Fetal blood sampling may confirm the diagnosis (Duncombe, 2001; Heckel, 1997; Srisupundit, 2008). Conirmed fetal thyrotoxicosis is followed by maternal antithyroid treatment. During this, if the mother develops hypothyroidism, she is given supplementalilevothyroxine (Hui, 2011). In a woman receiving medication for Graves disease, transplacental passage of methimazole or propylthiouracil may cause etal hypothyroidism (Bliddal, 2011 a). Other potential causes of fetal hypothyroidism resulting in goiter include transplacental passage of thyroid peroxidase antibodies, fetal thyroid dyshormonogenesis, and maternal overconsumption of iodine supple ments (Agrawal, 2002; Overcash, 2016). Goitrous hypothyroidism may lead to hydramnios, neck hyperextension, and delayed bone maturation. If the mother is receiving antithyroid medication, discontinuation is generally recommended, along with intraamnionic levothyroxine injection. Numerous case reports describe intraamnionic levothyroxine treatment. However, optimal dosage and frequency have not been established, and reported dosages range from 50 to 800 �g every 1 to 4 weeks (Abuhamad, 1995; Bliddal, 2011b; Ribault, 2009) .
It should be noted that current guidelines still support tPA as first-line therapy even for those eligible for mechanical thrombectomy.Patients not eligible for tPA or mechanical thrombectomy require hemodynamic optimization and neurologic monitoring. Admit such patients to the ICU stroke service for blood pres-sure management and frequent neurologic checks. Permissive hypertension allows for maximal cerebral perfusion. Systolic blood pressure >180 mmHg may require treatment, but the opti-mal mean arterial pressure goal is between 100 and 140 mmHg. Give normal saline solution without glucose (which could injure neurons in the penumbra due to osmotic fluid shift), and aim for normovolemia. A stroke patient who worsens clinically should undergo repeat head CT to evaluate for hemorrhage or increas-ing mass effect from swelling, which typically peaks 3 to 5 days after the stroke. Significant swelling from an MCA or cerebellar stroke may cause herniation and brain stem injury. A decom-pressive hemicraniectomy or suboccipital craniectomy can be a life-saving intervention for these select stroke patients. In stud-ies of malignant MCA syndrome, decompressive hemicraniec-tomy showed favorable mortality and functional outcomes.59 This treatment option, however, should be considered with the understanding of potentially poor functional recovery regardless of therapy. One study showed that less than half of malignant MCA patients who underwent decompressive hemicraniectomy returned home following rehabilitation, which is even fewer for those undergoing medical therapy.60Hemorrhagic DiseasesIntracranial hemorrhage from abnormal or diseased vascular structures accounts for approximately 15% of acute cerebrovas-cular events. Hypertension and amyloid angiopathy account for most intraparenchymal hemorrhages, although AVMs, aneu-rysms, venous thrombosis, tumors, hemorrhagic conversion of ischemic infarct, and fungal infections also may be the cause. The term intracranial hemorrhage is frequently used to signify intraparenchymal hemorrhage and will be used here. Intracra-nial hemorrhage causes local neuronal injury and dysfunction and also may cause global dysfunction due to mass effect if sufficiently large. The Intracerebral Hemorrhage (ICH Score) is commonly used to risk-stratify these patients, and it takes into account GCS, age, hemorrhage volume, presence of intraven-tricular hemorrhage, and location to predict mortality. AVM or aneurysm rupture (along with trauma, discussed previously in this chapter) result in subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) because the major cerebral and cortical blood vessels travel in the sub-arachnoid space, between the pia and the arachnoid membranes.
Fast track CT scanning should be used in all patients manifesting evidence of shock. The surgeon must accompany the patient and be prepared to abort the CT scan with diversion to the OR. This dilemma is becoming less common in many trauma centers where CT scanning is available in the ED.The concept of hypotensive resuscitation remains contro-versial, and it is primarily relevant for patients with penetrating vascular injuries. Experimental work suggests that an endog-enous sealing clot of an injured artery may be disrupted at a SBP of >90 mmHg32; thus, many believe that this should be the preoperative blood pressure target for patients with potential noncompressible arterial injuries. On the other hand, optimal management of traumatic brain injury (TBI) includes maintain-ing the SBP >100 mmHg,33 and thus, hypotensive resuscitation is not appropriate for most blunt trauma patients.Secondary SurveyOnce the immediate threats to life have been addressed, a thor-ough history is obtained, and the patient is examined in a sys-tematic fashion. The patient and surrogates should be queried to obtain an AMPLE history (Allergies, Medications, Past illnesses or Pregnancy, Last meal, and Events related to the injury). The physical examination should be literally head to toe, with special attention to the patient’s back, axillae, and perineum, because injuries here are easily overlooked. All seriously injured patients should undergo digital rectal examination to evaluate for sphincter tone, presence of blood, rectal perforation, or a high-riding prostate; this is particularly critical in patients with suspected spinal cord injury, pelvic fracture, or transpelvic gun-shot wounds. Vaginal examination with a speculum should be performed in women with pelvic fractures to exclude an open fracture. Specific injuries, their associated signs and symptoms, diagnostic options, and treatments are discussed in detail later in this chapter.Adjuncts to the physical examination include vital sign and ECG monitoring, nasogastric tube placement, Foley cath-eter placement, radiographs, hemoglobin, base deficit measure-ments, urinalysis, and repeat FAST exam. A nasogastric tube should be inserted in all intubated patients to decrease the risk of gastric aspiration, but it may not be necessary in the awake patient. Nasogastric tube placement in patients with complex mid-facial fractures is contraindicated; rather, a tube should be placed orally if required. Nasogastric tube evaluation of stomach contents for blood may suggest occult gastroduodenal injury, or the errant path of the nasogastric tube on a chest film may indicate a left diaphragm injury. A Foley catheter should be inserted in patients unable to void to decompress the blad-der, obtain a urine specimen, and monitor urine output. Gross hematuria demands evaluation of the genitourinary system for injury.
One approach to these difficult situations is to make decisions in the “best interests” of patients, but because such decisions require value judgments about which thoughtful peo-ple frequently disagree, ethicists, lawyers, and legislators have sought a more reliable solution. Advance directives of various forms have been developed to carry forward into the future the autonomous choices of competent adults regarding healthcare decisions. Furthermore, the courts often accept “informal” advance directives in the form of sworn testimony about state-ments the patient made at some time previous to their illness. When a formal document expressing the patient’s advance directives fails to exist, surgeons should consider the comments patients and families make when asked about their wishes in the setting of debilitating illness.Living wills are written to anticipate treatment options and choices in the event that a patient is incapacitated by a terminal illness. In the living will, the patient indicates which treatments she wishes to permit or prohibit in the setting of terminal illness. The possible treatments addressed often include mechanical ventilation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, artificial nutri-tion, dialysis, antibiotics, or transfusion of blood products. Unfor-tunately, living wills are often too vague to offer concrete guidance in complex clinical situations, and the language (“termi-nal illness,” “artificial nutrition”) can be interpreted in many ways. Furthermore, by limiting the directive only to “terminal” conditions, it does not provide guidance for common clinical sce-narios like advanced dementia, delirium, or persistent vegetative states where the patient is unable to make decisions, but is not “terminally” ill. Perhaps even more problematic is the evidence that demonstrates that healthy patients cannot reliably predict their preferences when they are actually sick. This phenomenon is called “affective forecasting” and applies to many situations. For example, the general public estimates the health-related qual-ity of life (HRQoL) score of patients on dialysis at 0.39, although dialysis patients themselves rate their HRQoL at 0.56.19 Similarly, patients with colostomies rated their HRQoL at 0.92, compared to a score of 0.80 given by the general public for patients with colostomies.19 For these and other reasons, living wills are often unable to provide the extent of assistance they promise.20An alternative to living wills is the durable power of attor-ney for healthcare in which patients identify surrogate decision makers and invest them with the authority to make healthcare decisions on their behalf in the event that they are unable to speak for themselves. Proponents of this approach hope that the surrogate will be able to make decisions that reflect the choices that the patients themselves would make if they were able. Unfortunately, several studies demonstrate that surrogates are not much better than chance at predicting the choices patients make when the patient is able to state a preference. For example, a recent meta-analysis found that surrogates predicted patients’ treatment preferences with only 68% accuracy.21 These data reveal a flaw in the guiding principle of surrogate decision making: Surrogates do not necessarily have privileged insight into the autonomous preferences of patients. However, the dura-ble power of attorney at least allows patients to choose the person who will eventually make prudential decisions on their behalf and in their best interests; therefore, respecting the judgment of the surrogate is a way of respecting the self-determination of the incapacitated patient.22There is continuing enthusiasm for a wider use of advance directives. In fact, the 1991 Patient Self Determination Act requires all U.S. healthcare facilities to (a) inform patients of 334Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206419/02/19   1:49 PM 2065ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48their rights to have advance directives, and (b) to document those advance directives in the chart at the time any patient is admitted to the healthcare facility.4 However, only a minority of patients in U.S. hospitals have advance directives despite concerted efforts to teach the public of their benefits and pro-vide resources to help patients prepare and maintain them.
Ropper AH, King RB: Intracranial pressure monitoring in comatose patients with cerebral hemorrhage. Arch Neurol 41:725, 1984. Ropper AH, Shafran B: Brain edema after stroke: Clinical syndrome and intracranial pressure. Arch Neurol 41:26, 1984. Rost NS, Smith EE, Chang Y, et al: Prediction of functional outcome in patients with primary intracerebral hemorrhage: The FUNC score. Stroke 39:2304, 2008. Rothwell PM, Elisziw M, Gutnikov SA, et al: Endarterectomy for symptomatic carotid artery stenosis in relation to clinical subgroups and timing of surgery. Lancet 363:915, 2004. Rothwell PM, Giles MF, Flossman E, et al: A simple score (ABCD) to identify individuals at high risk of stroke after transient ischemic attack. Lancet 366:29, 2005. Ruigrok TM, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, et al: Characteristics of intracranial aneurysms in patients with familial subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurology 62:891, 2004. Ruiz DSM, Yilmaz Y, Gailloud P: Cerebral developmental venous anomalies: Current concepts. Ann Neurol 66:271, 2009. Sacco RL, Diener HC, Yusuf S, et al: Aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole versus clopidogrel for recurrent stroke.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Am] Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015

Stabile I, Nicolaides KH, Bach A, et al: Complement factors in fetal and maternal blood and amniotic luid during the second trimester of normal pregnancy. BJOG 95:281, 1988

Stach Sc, Brizot Mde L, Liao AW, et al: Transplacental total IgG transfer in rwin pregnancies. Am J Reprod Immunol 72(6):555, 2014

Stockman JA III, deAlarcon PA: Hematopoiesis and granulopoiesis. In Polin A, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1327

Sussman 0, Lye S], Wells GO: Impact of matenal physical activity on fetal breathing and body movement-a review. Early Hum Dev 94:53, 2016

Temiras PS, Vernadakis A, Sherwood NM: Development and plasticiry of the nervous system. In AssaJi NS (ed): Biology of Gestation, Vol VII. he Fetus and Neonate .. New York, Academic Press, 1968

Thorpe-Beeston JG, Nicolaides KH, Felton CV, et al: Maturation of the secretion of thyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone in the fetus. N Engl J Med 324:532,s1991

Usher R, Shephard M, Lind ]: he blood volume of the newbon infant and placental transfusion. Acta Paediatr 52:497, 1963 Volpe JJ: Neurology of the Newborn, 5th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2008, p 85

Vulsma T, Gons MH, De Vijlder JJ: Maternal-fetal transfer of thyroxine in congenital hypothyroidism due to a total organi6cation defect or thyroid agenesis. N Engl] Med 321:13, 1989

Weiner CP, Sipes SL, Wenstrom K: The efect of fetal age upon normal fetal laboratory values and venous pressure. Obstet Gynecol 79:713, 1992 Wenstrom KO, Weiner CP, Williamson A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of fetal hyperthyroidism using funipuncture. Obstet Gynecol 76:513, 1990 Werlin SL: Exocrine pancreas. In Polin A, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology.
Obstet Gynecol 63:792, 1984

Lin Y, Ebb DH, Boepple PA, et al: Case 12-2015. A newborn boy with respiratory distress, lethargy, and hypernatremia. N Engl J Med 372(16):1550, 2015

Lindenburg IT, van Klink JM, Smits-Wintjens EH, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental and cardiovascular outcome after intrauterine transfusions for fetal anaemia: a review. Prenat Oiagn 33:815, 2013

Lindenskov PH, Castellheim A, Saugstad 00, et al: Meconium aspiration syndrome: possible pathophysiological mechanisms and future potetial therapies. Neonatology 107(3):225,t2015

Linder I, Melamed N, Kogan A, et al: Gender and birth trauma in full-term infants. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(9):1603,t2012

Lindqvist PG, Erichs K, Molnar C, et al: Characteristics and outcome of brachial plexus birth palsy in neonates. Acta Paediatr 101(6):579,t2012

Liu J, Shi Y, Dong JY, et al: Clinical characteristics, diagnosis and management of respiratory distress syndrome in full-term neonates. Clin Med J (Engl) 123:2640,t2010

Liu LY, Antaya RJ: Neonatal subgaleal hematoma from trauma during vaginal delivery without instrument use. Pediatr Dermatol 34(1):e40, 2017 Maisonneuve E, Audibert F, Guilbaud L, et al: Risk factors for severe neonatal acidosis. Obstet Gynecol 118(4):818,t2011 Malessy MJ, Pondaag W: Obstetric brachial plexus injuries. Neurosurg Clin North Am 20(1):1, 2009

Malin GL, Morris RK, Khan KS: Strength of association between umbilical cord pH and perinatal and long term outcomes: systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 340:cl471, 2010

Diseases and Injuries of the Term Newborn 633

MalIa R, Asimi R, T eli ..1A, et al: Erythropoietin monotherapy in perinatal asphyxia with moderate to severe encephalopathy: a randomized placebocontrolled trial. J Perinatol 37(5):596, 2017

Martinez-Biarge M, Madero R, Gonzalez A, et al: Perinatal morbidity and risk of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy associated with intrapartum sentinel events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(2): 148,t2012

McAdams M, Chabra 5: Umbilical cord haematoma and adrenal haemorrhage in a macrosomic neonate with anaemia. BMJ Case Rep February 3,2016

McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, et al: Efect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes.
Meconium staining of the umbilical cord, nails, and skin suggest fetal distress and the possibility of aspiration pneumonia. The level of spontaneous activity, passive muscle tone, quality of the cry, and apnea are useful screening signs to evaluate the state of the nervous system. The examination should proceed with an assessment of vital signs, particularly heart rate (normal rate, 120 to 160 beats/min); respiratory rate (normal rate, 30 to 60 breaths/min); temperature (usually done per rectum and later as an axillary measurement); and blood pressure (often reserved for sick infants). Length, weight, and head circumference should be measured and plotted on growth curves to determine whether growth is normal, accelerated, or retarded for the specific gestational age. Figure 58-3 Physical criteria for assessment of maturity and gestational age. Expanded New Ballard Score (NBS) includes extremely premature infants and has been refined to improve accuracy in more mature infants. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al: New Ballard Score, expanded to include extremely premature infants, J Pediatr 119:417-423, 1991.) Gestational age is determined by an assessment of various physical signs (Fig. 58-3) and neuromuscular characteristics (Fig. 58-4) that vary according to fetal age and maturity. Physical criteria mature with advancing fetal age, including increasing firmness of the pinna of the ear; increasing size of the breast tissue; decreasing fine, immature lanugo hair over the back; and decreasing opacity of the skin. Neurologic criteria mature with gestational age, including increasing flexion of the legs, hips, and arms; increasing tone of the flexor muscles of the neck; and decreasing laxity of the joints. These signs are determined during the first day of life and are assigned scores. The cumulative score is correlated with a gestational age, which is usually accurate to within 2 weeks (Fig. 58-5).
However, the high levels of estradiol and progesterone produced by the placenta suppress hypothalamic-pituitary stimulation of ovarian hormonal secretion in the fetus. After birth and the loss of placenta-derived steroids, gonadotropin levels rise. FSH levels are much higher in girls than in boys. This rise in FSH results in ovarian activation (evident on ultrasound) and increased inhibin B and estradiol levels. Studies that have identified mutations in TAC3, which encodes neurokinin B, and its receptor, TAC3R, in patients with GnRH deficiency indicate that both are involved in control of GnRH secretion and may be particularly important at this early stage of development. By 12–20 months of age, the reproductive axis is again suppressed, and a period of relative quiescence persists until puberty (Fig. 412-5). At the onset of puberty, pulsatile GnRH secretion induces pituitary gonadotropin production. In the early stages of puberty, LH and FSH secretion are apparent only during sleep, but as puberty develops, pulsatile gonadotropin secretion occurs throughout the day and night. FIGURE 412-4 Establishment of a functional gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) system requires the participation of a number of genes that are essential for development and migration of GnRH neurons from the olfactory placode to the hypothalamus in addition to genes involved in the functional control of GnRH secretion and action. KAL 1 FGR8/FGFR1 NSMF PROK2/PROKR2 OlfactoryplacodePituitaryHypothalamusGnRH1 GnRHR TAC3R KISS1R KISS1 TAC3 MigrationFunction

The mechanisms responsible for the childhood quiescence and pubertal reactivation of the reproductive axis remain incompletely understood. GnRH neurons in the hypothalamus respond to both excitatory and inhibitory factors. Increased sensitivity to the inhibitory influence of gonadal steroids has long been implicated in the inhibition of GnRH secretion during childhood but has not been definitively established in the human. Metabolic signals, such as adipocyte-derived leptin, play a permissive role in reproductive function (Chap. 415e).
Strict glucose control (with diet, exercise, insulin therapy, and frequent self-monitoring for type 1 and type 2 DM) to minimize fetal defects. Fasting morning: ≤ 90 mg/dL. Two-hour postprandial: < 120 mg/dL. Fetus: 18–20 weeks: Ultrasound to determine fetal age and growth; evaluate for cardiac anomalies and polyhydramnios; quad screen to screen for developmental anomalies. 32–34 weeks: Close fetal surveillance (e.g., NST, CST, BPP). Admit if maternal DM has been poorly controlled or fetal parameters are a concern. Serial ultrasounds for fetal growth. Delivery and postpartum:

Maintain normoglycemia (80–100 mg/dL) during labor with an IV insulin drip and hourly glucose measurements. Consider early delivery in the setting of poor maternal glucose control, preeclampsia, macrosomia, or evidence of fetal lung maturity. Cesarean delivery should be considered for an estimated fetal weight (EFW) > 4500 g.

Greater than eight, investigate! If HbA1c is > 8%, look for congenital abnormalities. If UA before 20 weeks reveals glycosuria, think pregestational diabetes. Hyperglycemia in the f rst trimester suggests preexisting diabetes and should be managed as pregestational diabetes. Encourage breastfeeding with an appropriate ↑ in caloric intake. Continue glucose monitoring postpartum.
Management of the Near-Term Fetus

As shown in Figure 44-9, delivery of a suspected growthrestricted fetus with normal umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, normal amnionic luid volume, and reassuring fetal heart rate testing can likely be deferred until 38 weeks' gestation. Said another way, uncertainty regarding the diagnosis should preclude intervention until fetal lung maturity is assured. Expectant management can be guided using antepartum fetal surveillance techniques described in Chapter 17. Most clinicians, however, recommend delivery at 34 weeks or beyond if there is clinically signiicant oligohydramnios. Consensus statements by the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (Spong, 2011) and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a) are similar. These recommend delivery between 34 and 37 weeks when there are comorbid conditions such as oligohydramnios. With a reassuring fetal heart rate pattern, vaginal delivery is planned. Notably, some of these fetuses do not tolerate labor. Management of the Fetus Remote from Term

If growth restriction is identiied in an anatomically normal fetus before 34 weeks, and amnionic luid volume and fetal surveillance indings are normal, observation is recommended. Screening for toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus infection, rubella, herpes, and other infections is recommended by some. However, we and others have not found this to be productive (Yamamoto, 2013). As long as interval fetal growth and fetal surveillance test results are normal, pregnancy is allowed to continue until fetal lung maturity is reached (see Fig. 44-9). Reassessment of fetal growth is typically made no sooner than 3 to 4 weeks. Weekly assessment of umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry and amnionic fluid volume is combined with periodic nons tress testing, although the optimal frequency has not been determined.
Eur ] Clin Invest 7:47, 1977

Lindheimer MD, Davison ]M, Katz AI: he kidney and hypertension in pregnancy: twenty exciting years. Semin NephroI21:173, 2001

Lindheimer MD, Griinfeld ]P, Davison ]M: Renal disorders. In Barran WM, Lindheimer MD (eds): Medical Disorders During Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000, p 39

Lindheimer MD, Kanter D: Interpreting abnormal proteinuria in pregnancy: the need for a more pathophysiological approach. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):365,r2010

Lindheimer MD, Richardson DA, Ehrlich EN, et al: Potassium homeostasis in pregnancy.r] Reprod Med 32:517,r1987

Lippi G, Albiero A, Montagnana M, et al: Lipid and lipoprotein profile in physiological pregnancy. Clin Lab 53: 173, 2007

Liur], Sun B, Yin H, et al: Hepcidin: a promising therapeutic target for iron disorders: a systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) 95:e3150, 2016

Liu X, Arany Z: Maternal cardiac metabolism in pregnancy. Cardiovasc Res 101:545,r2014 Lowe L, Karbanr]: Genetics, genomics and metabolomics: new insights into maternal metabolism during pregnancy. Diabet Med 31 :254, 2014

Lumbers ER, Pringle KG: Roles of the circulating renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in human pregnancy. Am] Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 306:R91,r2014

Lynn N, Steinkeler ]A, Wilkins-Haug LE, et al: Hyperreactio luteinalis (enlarged ovaries) during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy: common clinical associations.r] Ultrasound Med 32:1285,r2013

Macedo M, Kim B, Khoury R, et al: A rare case of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Am] Emerg Med 35(4):668.e1, 2017

Macfie AG, Magides D, Richmond MN, et al: Gastric emptying in pregnancy. Br] Anaesth 67:54, 1991

Mahendru A, Everett TR, Wilkinson IB, et al: Maternal cardiovascular changes from pre-pregnancy to very early pregnancy. ] Hypertens 30(11):2168,r2012

Majed BH, Khalil A: Molecular mechanisms regulating the vascular prostacyclin pathways and their adaptation during pregnancy and in the newborn. Pharmacol Rev 64(3):540, 2012

Malinowski AK, Senr], Sermer M: Hyperreactio luteinalis: maternal and fetal efects.r] Obstet Gynaecol Can 37:715, 2015

Mandala M, 0501 G: Physiological remodeling of the maternal uterine circulation during pregnancy. Basic Clin Pharmacol ToxicolrllO:12, 2012 Mardones-Santander F, Salazar G, Rosso P, et al: Maternal body composition near term and birth weight.
Toulis KA, Goulis DG, Kolibianakis EM, et al. Risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and a meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2009;92:667–677. 15. Practice Committee of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine. The evaluation and treatment of androgen excess. Fertil Steril 2006;86:S173–S180. 16. Nestler JE. Metformin for the treatment of the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 2008;358:47–54. 17. Stein IF, Leventhal ML. Amenorrhea associated with bilateral polycystic ovaries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1935;29:181–191.
The route of delivery is dictated by obstetrical factors. Certainly, most women with superimposed severe preeclampsia are better delivered even when the fetus is markedly preterm. Increased risk for placental abruption, cerebral hemorrhage, and peripartum heart failure attend delivery delays (Cunningham, 1986, 2005; Martin, 2005). For women with chronic hypertension without preeclampsia, expectant management at later gestational ages was reported recently by Harper and colleagues (2016). They concluded that expectant management beyond 39 weeks' gestation was associated with an increasing incidence of severe preeclampsia and that planned delivery before 37 weeks was associated with a rise in rates of adverse neonatal outcomes. For women with mild to moderate chronic hypertension who continue to have an uncomplicated pregnancy, the merican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2013) recommends delivery not be pursued until 38°17 weeks. The consensus committee indings by Spong and associates (2011) recommend consideration for delivery at 38 to 39 weeks, that is, :::37 completed weeks. A trial of labor induction is preferable, and many of these women respond favorably and will be delivered vaginally (Alexander, 1999; Atkinson, 1995). For women with severe preeclampsia, peripartum management is the same as described in Chapter 40 (p. 729). Epidural analgesia for labor and delivery is optimal with the caveat that it is not given to treat hypertension (Lucas, 2001). hat said, women with severe superimposed preeclampsia are more sensitive to the acute hypotensive efects of epidural analgesia (Vricella, 2012). Also in this group, magnesium sulfate neuroprophylaxis is initiated for prevention of eclampsia. Severe hypertension-diastolic blood pressure :::110 mm Hg or systolic pressurea:::160 mm Hg-is treated with either intravenous hydralazine or labetalol. Some prefer to treat women when the diastolic pressure reaches 100 to 105 mm Hg. Vigil-De Gracia and colleagues (2006) randomly assigned 200 women to intravenous hydralazine or labetalol to acutely lower severe high blood pressure in pregnancy.
Occurs frequently in those <30 years old; outbreaks in military recruits, prisons, colleges. X-ray looks worse than patient. High titer of cold agglutinins (IgM), which can agglutinate RBCs. Treatment: macrolides, doxycycline, or fluoroquinolone (penicillin ineffective since Mycoplasma has no cell wall). Not seen on Gram stain. Pleomorphic

A . Bacterial membrane contains sterols for stability. Grown on Eaton agar. Mycoplasma gets cold without a coat (no cell wall). Can cause atypical variant of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, typically in children and adolescents. Mississippi and Ohio Macrophage filled River Valleys with Histoplasma (smaller than RBC)

Eastern and Central Broad-based budding US, Great Lakes of Blastomyces (same size as RBC)

Southwestern US, Spherule (much larger California than RBC) filled with endospores of Coccidioides

Latin America Budding yeast of Paracoccidioides with “captain’s wheel” formation (much larger than RBC)

Palatal/tongue ulcers, splenomegaly, pancytopenia

Disseminates to bone/ skin (may mimic SCC)

Disseminates to skin/ bone

Similar to blastomycosis, males > females Histo hides (within macrophages)

Associated with bird or bat droppings (eg, spelunking)

Associated with dust exposure in endemic areas (eg, archeological excavations, earthquakes)

Paracoccidio parasails with the captain’s wheel all the way to Latin America alba = white. Dimorphic; forms pseudohyphae and budding yeasts at 20°C A , germ tubes at 37°C B . Systemic or superficial fungal infection. Causes oral C and esophageal thrush in immunocompromised (neonates, steroids, diabetes, AIDS), vulvovaginitis (diabetes, use of antibiotics), diaper rash, endocarditis (IV drug users), disseminated candidiasis (especially in neutropenic patients), chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Treatment: oral fluconazole/topical azoles for vaginal; nystatin, azoles, or, rarely, echinocandins for oral; fluconazole, echinocandins, or amphotericin B for esophageal or systemic disease.
The findings of small testes and a microphallus in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. He may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/ cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testosterone. He should also be evaluated for the pres-ence of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with desmopressin, a V2 vasopressin receptor–selective analog. Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status. The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid hormones—triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine (T4, thyroxine)—to normalize growth and development, body temperature, and energy levels.
His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not? The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered lactam ring. All penicillins have the basic structure shown in Figure 43–1. A thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples shown in Figure 43–2) can be attached to the amino group.
(Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.) Figure 25e-27 Erythema progressing to bullae with result-ing sloughing of the entire thickness of the epidermis occurs in toxic epidermal necrolysis. This reaction was due to a sulfonamide. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.) Figure 25e-29 This infant with staphylococcal scalded skin syn-drome demonstrates generalized desquamation. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.) CHAPTER 25e Atlas of Rashes Associated with Fever

Figure 25e-30 Fissuring of the lips and an erythematous exan-them are evident in this patient with Kawasaki disease. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.) PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Figure 25e-31 Numerous varicella lesions at various stages of evolution: vesicles on an erythematous base and umbilicated vesicles, which then develop into crusting lesions. (Courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.) Figure 25e-33 Herpes zoster is seen in this patient taking predni-sone. Grouped vesicles and crusted lesions are seen in the T2 derma-tome on the back and arm (A) and on the right side of the chest (B).
Not contraindications to vaccination. Tests to rule out shaken baby syndrome. A neonate has meconium ileus. Bilious emesis within hours after the first feeding. A two-month-old baby presents with nonbilious projectile emesis. What are the appropriate steps in management? The most common 1° immunodeficiency. An infant has a high fever and onset of rash as fever breaks. What is he at risk for? What is the immunodeficiency? A boy has chronic respiratory infections. Nitroblue tetrazolium test is . A child has eczema, thrombocytopenia, and high levels of IgA. A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
If the INR is over 10, oral vitamin K should observational studies suggested that patients with thrombosis com-be administered, at a dose of 2.5–5 mg, although there is no evidence plicating the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome required higherthat doing so reduces the bleeding risk. Higher doses of oral vitamin intensity warfarin regimens to prevent recurrent thromboembolicK (5–10 mg) produce more rapid reversal of the INR but may render events, two randomized trials showed that targeting an INR of 2.0–3.0 patients temporarily resistant to warfarin when the drug is restarted. is as effective as higher intensity treatment and produces less bleed-Patients with serious bleeding need more aggressive treatment. These ing. Monitoring warfarin therapy can be problematic in patients with patients should be given 5–10 mg of vitamin K by slow IV infusion. antiphospholipid antibody syndrome if the lupus anticoagulant pro-Additional vitamin K should be given until the INR is in the nor-longs the baseline INR; factor X levels can be used instead of the INRmal range. Treatment with vitamin K should be supplemented with in such patients. fresh-frozen plasma as a source of the vitamin K–dependent clotting There is no need to stop warfarin before procedures associated withproteins. Four factor prothrombin complex concentrates, which con-a low risk of bleeding; these include dental cleaning, simple dentaltain all four vitamin K–dependent clotting proteins, are the treatment extraction, cataract surgery, or skin biopsy. For procedures associatedof choice for (1) life-threatening bleeds, (2) rapid restoration of the with a moderate or high risk of bleeding, warfarin should be stoppedINR into the normal range in patients requiring urgent surgery or 5 days before the procedure to allow the INR to return to normal levels. intervention, and (3) patients who cannot tolerate the volume load of Patients at high risk for thrombosis, such as those with mechanicalfresh-frozen plasma. heart valves, can be bridged with onceor twice-daily SC injections ofWarfarin-treated patients who experience bleeding when their INR LMWH when the INR falls to <2.0. The last dose of LMWH should beis in the therapeutic range require investigation into the cause of the given 12–24 h before the procedure, depending on whether LMWH isbleeding. Those with gastrointestinal or genitourinary bleeding often administered twice or once daily. After the procedure, treatment with have an underlying lesion.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
ACTIVE Investigators: Effect of clopidogrel added to aspirin in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 360:2006, 2009. ACTIVE Writing Group, The: Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus oral anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation in the atrial fibrillation clopidogrel trial with Irbesartan for prevention of vascular events (ACTIVE W)—a randomized trial. Lancet 367:1903, 2006. Adams HP Jr, Butler MJ, Biller J, Toffol GN: Nonhemorrhagic cerebral infarction in young adults. Arch Neurol 43:793, 1986. Adams RD: Mechanisms of apoplexy as determined by clinical and pathological correlation. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 13:1, 1954. Adams RD, Cammermeyer J, Fitzgerald PJ: The neuropathological aspects of thrombotic acroangiothrombosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 11:1, 1948. Adams RJ, McKie VC, Hsu L, et al: Prevention of first stroke by transfusion in children with sickle cell anemia and abnormal results on transcranial ultrasonography. N Engl J Med 339:5, 1998. Adler JR, Ropper AH: Self-audible venous bruits and high jugular bulb. Arch Neurol 43:257, 1986. Ahlgren E, Arén C: Cerebral complications after coronary artery bypass surgery and heart valve surgery: Risk factors and onset of symptoms.
Initially, patients younger than 65 years of age in this and other trials did not clearly benefit from long-term prophylactic anticoagulation unless there were additional cerebrovascular risk factors such as diabetes, hypertension, congestive heart failure, or cardiac valvular disease but newer studies have extended this age range for those with atrial fibrillation. (Those younger than 65 years old and without such additional features [formerly called lone fibrillators], constituting about one-third of adults with atrial fibrillation, have a low risk of stroke). In order to estimate the risk of stroke in atrial fibrillation, including age as a factor so as to address those younger than 65, two variants of what are termed CHADS scores have been developed as summarized in Table 33-3. Aspirin does not appear to afford the same degree of protective benefit as does anticoagulation for primary risk stroke reduction in atrial fibrillation, and some studies suggest if there are no other risk factors for stroke, there may be slightly better risk reduction for stroke with aspirin than with no treatment. For patients under age 65 and without other risk factors for stroke, reflected usually by a low CHADS score, aspirin may be reasonable preventive measure. The appropriate dose of aspirin has not been established but former trials of very large doses, for example, 1 g/d, conferred risk of bleeding. A determination of prothrombin and partial thromboplastin activity is needed before therapy is started with warfarin, but if this is not feasible, the initial doses of anticoagulant drugs can usually be given safely if there is no clinical evidence of bleeding anywhere in the body and there has been no recent surgery. Warfarin, beginning with a dose of 5 to 10 mg daily, is relatively safe provided that the international normalized ratio (INR) is brought only to 2 to 3 (formerly measured as a prothrombin time between 16 and 19 s) and the level is determined regularly (an approximate plan is once a day for the first 5 days, then 2 or 3 times a week for 1 to 2 weeks, and finally once every several weeks). Numerous drugs may alter the anticoagulant effects of the coumarins or add to the risk of bleeding—aspirin, cholestyramine, alcohol, carbamazepine, cephalosporin and quinolone antibiotics, sulfa drugs, and high-dosage penicillin being the most important ones. Hemorrhagic skin necrosis is a rare but dangerous complication. It is the result of a paradoxical microthrombosis of skin vessels and is liable to occur in patients with unsuspected deficiencies of endogenous clotting proteins (S and C). Although the disseminated form of skin necrosis occurs within days of initiating warfarin therapy, we have seen one patient with a form of this lesion following local skin injury after months on treatment. The introduction of factor Xa inhibitors has offered an alternative to the vitamin K antagonist, warfarin, for primary risk reduction of strokes in patients with atrial fibrillation. In one study by Granger and coworkers that used apixaban for this purpose, there were slightly fewer strokes and fewer cerebral hemorrhages than with warfarin when the intended goal with warfarin was to keep the INR between 2 and 3. Dabigatran and rivaroxaban confer similar reductions in stroke to apixaban and warfarin in atrial fibrillation (c.f., Patel et al).
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
She expressed concerns regarding possible adverse effects of prolonged systemic therapy. In light of this, daily morning application of brimonidine 0.33% gel was added to her treatment regimen. The patient noted prompt response with significant improvement of her facial redness. Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases

Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD

A 21-year-old woman comes with her parents to discuss therapeutic options for her Crohn’s disease. She was diag-nosed with Crohn’s disease 2 years ago, and it involves her terminal ileum and proximal colon, as confirmed by colonoscopy and small bowel radiography. She was initially treated with mesalamine and budesonide with good response, but over the last 2 months, she has had a relapse of her symptoms. She is experiencing fatigue, cramping, abdominal pains, and nonbloody diarrhea up to 10 times daily, and she has had a 15-lb weight loss. She has no other significant medical or surgical his-tory. Her current medications are mesalamine 2.4 g/d and budesonide 9 mg/d. She appears thin and tired. Abdominal examination reveals tenderness without guarding in the right lower quadrant; no masses are palpable. On perianal examination, there is no tenderness, fissure, or fistula. Her laboratory data are notable for anemia and elevated C-reactive protein. What are the options for immediate con-trol of her symptoms and disease? What are the long-term management options?
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory.
Jeppesen PB et al: Teduglutide reduces need for parenteral support among patients with short bowel syndrome with intestinal failure. Gastroenterology 2012;143:1473. The immediate goals of therapy are to improve this young woman’s symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fatigue. Equally important goals are to reduce the intestinal inflammation in hopes of preventing progression to intestinal stenosis, fistulization, and need for surgery. One option now is to step up her therapy by giving her a slow, tapering course of systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone) for 8–12 weeks in order to quickly bring her symptoms and inflammation under control while also initiating therapy with an immunomodulator (eg, azathioprine or mercap-topurine) in hopes of achieving long-term disease remis-sion. If satisfactory disease control is not achieved within 3–6 months, therapy with an anti-TNF agent would then be recommended. Alternatively, patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease who have failed mesalamine may be treated upfront with both an anti-TNF agent and immu-nomodulators, which achieves higher remission rates than either agent alone and may improve long-term outcomes. Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents

Valerie B. Clinard, PharmD, & Robin L. Corelli, PharmD

Her social history is significant for alcohol use (three to four glasses of wine/night). Her vital signs include the following: temperature 99.8°F, blood pressure 132/64 mm Hg, pulse 78 bpm, and respiratory rate 15/min. On physical examination, she had left upper abdominal tenderness with evidence of hepatomegaly and mild scleral icterus. Laboratory data revealed the following: alanine aminotransferase, 527 IU/L (normal 10–35 IU/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 425 IU/L (normal < 35 IU/L); and bilirubin, 2.9 mg/dL (normal 0.1–0.3 mg/dL). What medications do OTC cold and flu preparations typically contain? Which of the OTC medications might have contrib-uted to the patient’s current symptoms? KH, a 55-year-old woman, presents to the emergency department with nausea, vomiting, and complaints of new-onset flu symptoms over the past several days. Her past medical history is significant for allergic rhinitis and chronic lower back pain secondary to a work-related fall 2 years ago.
Moreover, the volume of blood expectorated is important not only in determining the cause but also in gauging the urgency for further diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers. Patients rarely exsanguinate from hemoptysis but can effectively “drown” in aspirated blood. Large-volume hemoptysis, referred to as massive hemoptysis, is variably defined as hemoptysis of >200–600 mL in 24 h. Massive hemoptysis should be considered a medical emergency. All patients should be asked about current or former cigarette smoking; this behavior predisposes to chronic bronchitis and increases the likelihood of bronchogenic cancer. Practitioners should inquire about symptoms and signs suggestive of respiratory tract infection (including fever, chills, and dyspnea), recent inhalation exposures, recent use of illicit substances, and risk factors for venous thromboembolism. A medical history of malignancy or treatment thereof, rheumatologic disease, vascular disease, or underlying lung disease (e.g., bronchiectasis) may be relevant to the cause of hemoptysis. Because many causes of DAH can be part of a pulmonary-renal syndrome, specific inquiry into a history of renal insufficiency is important. The physical examination begins with an assessment of vital signs and oxygen saturation to gauge whether there is evidence of life-threatening bleeding. Tachycardia, hypotension, and decreased oxygen saturation mandate a more expedited evaluation of hemoptysis. A specific focus on respiratory and cardiac examinations is important; these examinations should include inspection of the nares, auscultation of the lungs and heart, assessment of the lower extremities for symmetric or asymmetric edema, and evaluation for jugular venous distention. Clubbing of the digits may suggest underlying lung diseases such as bronchogenic carcinoma or bronchiectasis, which predispose to hemoptysis. Similarly, mucocutaneous telangiectasias should raise the specter of pulmonary arterial-venous malformations. Diagnostic Evaluation For most patients, the next step in evaluation of hemoptysis should be a standard chest radiograph. If a source of bleeding is not identified on plain film, CT of the chest should be performed. CT allows better delineation of bronchiectasis, alveolar filling, cavitary infiltrates, and masses than does chest radiograph.
The most common symptoms are hemoptysis, chronic and productive cough, clubbing, malaise, or weight loss. CXR can suggest the diagnosis by the finding of a crescentic radiolu-cency above a rounded radiopaque lesion (Monad sign).The natural history varies greatly between patients and, therefore, treatment is individualized. Factors associated with poor prognosis include severe underlying pulmonary disease, growth in the number or size of the aspergilloma(s) during observation, immunosuppression or HIV infection, history of lung transplantation, chronic pulmonary sarcoidosis, and increasing Aspergillus-specific IgG titers. 10Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71201/03/19   7:01 PM

CHAPTER 19713CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAACBFigure 19-33. Pulmonary aspergilloma. A. The chest X-ray shows a solid mass within a cavity surrounded by a rim of air between the mass and cavity wall (Monad sign, arrows). B. A cut section shows the “fungus ball” occupying an old, fibrotic cavity. C. Histologic stain reveals characteristic Aspergillus hyphae invading the wall of the cavity.Asymptomatic patients can be observed without any additional therapy. Antifungals have limited utility due to the poor blood supply to the aspergilloma. Oral triazole therapy is now consid-ered the standard of care for chronic, cavitary pulmonary asper-gillosis. Hemoptysis is a harbinger of erosion of the disease into adjacent bronchial arteries and typically requires intervention. In the setting of very mild hemoptysis (e.g., blood-streaked spu-tum), cough suppression is warranted while further therapeutic evaluation is performed.Bronchial artery embolization is the first-line therapy for massive hemoptysis and may be definitive therapy.105 This is particularly important to consider for patients with severely impaired pulmonary function who may not have sufficient reserve to tolerate even a very small pulmonary resection. Operative intervention may be required for recur-rent hemoptysis, particularly after bronchial artery emboli-zation, chronic cough with systemic symptoms, progressive infiltrate around the mycetoma, and a pulmonary mass of unknown cause.106When operative intervention is indicated, the surgeon must remain cognizant of the goals of the procedure.
If a source of bleeding is not identified on plain film, CT of the chest should be performed. CT allows better delineation of bronchiectasis, alveolar filling, cavitary infiltrates, and masses than does chest radiograph. The practitioner should consider a CT protocol to assess for pulmonary embolism if the history or examination suggests venous thromboembolism as a cause of bleeding. Quantify amount of bleeding History and physical exam Patient with hemoptysis Mild Moderate Massive Rule out other sources: • Oropharynx • Gastrointestinal tract No risk factors* Risk factors* or recurrent bleeding Treat underlying disease (usually infection) CT scan if unrevealing, bronchoscopy Bleeding continues Treat underlying disease CT scan Bronchoscopy CXR, CBC, coagulation studies, UA, creatinine Secure airway Treat underlying disease Persistent bleeding *Risk Factors: smoking, age >40 Bleeding stops Embolization or resection FIguRE 48-2 Decision tree for evaluation of hemoptysis. CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; UA, urinalysis. Laboratory studies should include a complete blood count to assess both the hematocrit and the platelet count as well as coagulation studies. Renal function should be evaluated and urinalysis conducted because of the possibility of pulmonary-renal syndromes presenting with hemoptysis. The documentation of acute renal insufficiency or the detection of red blood cells or their casts on urinalysis should elevate suspicion of small-vessel vasculitis, and studies such as antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antiglomerular basement membrane antibody, and antinuclear antibody should be considered. If a patient is producing sputum, Gram’s and acid-fast staining as well as culture should be undertaken. If all of these studies are unrevealing, bronchoscopy should be considered. In any patient with a history of cigarette smoking, airway inspection should be part of the evaluation of new-onset hemoptysis as endobronchial lesions are not reliably visualized on CT.

For the most part, the treatment of hemoptysis varies with its etiology. However, large-volume, life-threatening hemoptysis generally requires immediate intervention regardless of the cause. The first step is to establish a patent airway, usually by endotracheal intubation and subsequent mechanical ventilation. As large-volume hemoptysis usually arises from an airway lesion, it is ideal to identify the site of bleeding by either chest imaging or bronchoscopy (more commonly rigid rather than flexible). The goals are then to isolate the bleeding to one lung and not to allow the preserved airspaces in the other lung to be filled with blood so that gas exchange is further impaired.
Cough generally indicates disease of the respiratory system. The clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it is associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it. Acute cough productive of phlegm is often a symptom of infection of the respiratory system, including processes affecting the upper airway (e.g., sinusitis, tracheitis), the lower airways (e.g., bronchitis, bronchiectasis), and the lung parenchyma (e.g., pneumonia). Both the quantity and quality of the sputum, including whether it is blood-streaked or frankly bloody, should be determined. Hemoptysis warrants an evaluation as delineated in Chap. 48. Chronic cough (defined as that persisting for >8 weeks) is commonly associated with obstructive lung diseases, particularly asthma and chronic bronchitis, as well as “nonrespiratory” diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux and postnasal drip. Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases, including IPF, frequently present as a persistent, nonproductive cough. As with dyspnea, all causes of cough are not respiratory in origin, and assessment should encompass a broad differential, including cardiac and gastrointestinal diseases as well as psychogenic causes. Additional Symptoms Patients with respiratory disease may report wheezing, which is suggestive of airways disease, particularly asthma. Hemoptysis can be a symptom of a variety of lung diseases, including infections of the respiratory tract, bronchogenic carcinoma, and pulmonary embolism. In addition, chest pain or discomfort is often thought to be respiratory in origin. As the lung parenchyma is not innervated with pain fibers, pain in the chest from respiratory disorders usually results from either diseases of the parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax) or pulmonary vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary hypertension). As many diseases of the lung can result in strain on

Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System 1662 the right side of the heart, patients may also present with symptoms of cor pulmonale, including abdominal bloating or distention and pedal edema (Chap. 279).
Perhaps most frequently, congestive heart failure with transmission of elevated left atrial pressures can lead to rupture of small alveolar capillaries. These patients rarely present with bright red blood but more commonly have pink, frothy sputum or blood-tinged secretions. Patients with a focal jet of mitral regurgitation can present with an upper-lobe opacity on chest radiography together with hemoptysis. This finding is thought to be due to focal increases in pulmonary capillary pressure due to the regurgitant jet. Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations are prone to bleeding. Pulmonary embolism can also lead to the development of hemoptysis, which is generally associated with pulmonary infarction. Pulmonary arterial hypertension from other causes rarely results in hemoptysis. As with most signs of possible illness, the initial step in the evaluation of hemoptysis is a thorough history and physical examination (Fig. 48-2). As already mentioned, initial questioning should focus on ascertaining whether the bleeding is truly from the respiratory tract and not the nasopharynx or gastrointestinal tract; bleeding from the latter sources requires different approaches to evaluation and treatment. History and Physical Examination The specific characteristics of hemoptysis may be helpful in determining an etiology, such as whether the expectorated material consists of blood-tinged, purulent secretions; pink, frothy sputum; or pure blood. Information on specific triggers

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases of the bleeding (e.g., recent inhalation exposures) as well as any previous episodes of hemoptysis should be elicited during history-taking. Monthly hemoptysis in a woman suggests catamenial hemoptysis from pulmonary endometriosis. Moreover, the volume of blood expectorated is important not only in determining the cause but also in gauging the urgency for further diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers. Patients rarely exsanguinate from hemoptysis but can effectively “drown” in aspirated blood.
A low LES pressure predicts failure of drug therapy and provides a rationale to proceed to surgery. Poor esophageal body peristalsis raises concern about postoperative dysphagia and directs the choice of surgical tech nique. Nonacidic reflux may be detected by combined esophageal impedance-pH testing in medication-unresponsive patients. Upper endoscopy is recommended as the initial test in patients with unexplained dyspepsia who are >55 years old or who have alarm factors because of the purported elevated risks of malig nancy and ulcer in these groups. However, endoscopic findings in unexplained dyspepsia include erosive esophagitis in 13%, peptic ulcer in 8%, and gastric or esophageal malignancy in only 0.3%. Management of patients <55 years old without alarm factors depends on the local prevalence of H. pylori infection. In regions with low H. pylori prevalence (<10%), a 4-week trial of an acid- suppressing medication such as a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) is recommended. If this fails, a “test and treat” approach is most commonly applied. H. pylori status is determined with urea breath testing, stool antigen measurement, or blood serology testing. Those who are H. pylori positive are given therapy to eradicate the infection. If symptoms resolve on either regimen, no further inter vention is required. For patients in areas with high H. pylori preva lence (>10%), an initial test and treat approach is advocated, with a subsequent trial of an acid-suppressing regimen offered for those in whom H. pylori treatment fails or for those who are negative for the infection. In each of these patient subsets, upper endoscopy is reserved for those whose symptoms fail to respond to therapy. Further testing is indicated in some settings. If bleeding is noted, a blood count can exclude anemia.
Duodenal ulcer is about twice as common in men compared to women, but the incidence of gastric ulcer is similar in men and women. On average, gastric ulcer patients are older than duodenal ulcer patients, and the incidence is increasing in the elderly, perhaps because of increasing NSAID and aspirin.DiagnosisIn the young patient with dyspepsia and without alarm symp-toms, it may be appropriate to initiate empirical PPI therapy for PUD without upper endoscopy or upper GI series. NSAIDs and aspirin should be stopped if the patient is taking these drugs, and Helicobacter should be ruled out with testing and treated if pres-ent. It is prudent to discuss with the patient the small possibility of an alternative diagnosis, including malignancy, even if symp-toms improve with the initiation of empiric therapy. Patients with persistent dyspepsia, and those who cannot stop NSAIDs or aspirin for health reasons should have an upper endoscopy, and all patients, regardless of age, should have this study if any alarm symptoms (see Table 26-5) are present. A double-contrast upper GI X-ray study may be useful. Once an ulcer has been confirmed endoscopically or radiologically, obvious possible causes (Helicobacter, NSAIDs, gastrinoma, cancer) should always be considered. All gastric ulcers should be adequately biopsied, and any sites of gastritis should be biopsied to rule out H pylori, and for histologic evaluation. Additional testing for H pylori may be indicated. It is reasonable to test all peptic IIIIIIIVVNSAID-inducedAcid hypersecretionFigure 26-30. Modified Johnson classification for gastric ulcer. I. Lesser curve, incisura. II. Body of stomach, incisura + duodenal ulcer (active or healed).
Scheiman JM: The use of proton pump inhibitors in treating and preventing

NSAID-induced mucosal damage. Arthritis Res Ther 2013;15(Suppl 3):S5. Schubert ML: Gastric secretion. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2014;30:578. Sigterman KE et al: Short-term treatment with proton pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, and prokinetics for gastro-oesophageal reflux disease-like symptoms and endoscopy negative reflux disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;5:CD002095. Camilleri M et al: Clinical guideline: Management of gastroparesis. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:18. Enweluzo C et al: Gastroparesis: A review of current and emerging treatment options. Clin Exp Gastroenterol 2013;6:161. Farmer AD: Diabetic gastroparesis: Pathophysiology, evaluation and management. Br J Hosp Med 2012;73:451. Bharucha AE et al: American Gastroenterological Association Medical Position Statement on constipation. Gastroenterology 2013;144:211. Brenner DM et al: Chronic constipation.
Monitor the patient’s hematocrit and BP and treat with IV hydration, transfusion, IV PPIs, endoscopy, and surgery as needed for complications. If perforation is likely, emergent surgery is indicated. Pharmacologic:

Involves protecting the mucosa, decreasing acid production, and eradicating H. pylori infection. Treat mild disease with antacids or with sucralfate, bismuth, and misoprostol (a prostaglandin analog) for mucosal protection. PPIs or H2 receptor antagonists may be used to ↓ acid secretion. Patients with confirmed H. pylori infection should receive triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole). Discontinue use of exacerbating agents. Patients with recurrent or severe disease may require chronic symptomatic therapy. Endoscopy and surgery:

Patients with symptomatic gastric ulcers for > 2 months that are refractory to medical therapy should have either endoscopy or an upper GI series with barium to rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. Refractory cases may require a surgical procedure such as parietal cell vagotomy (the most selective and preferred surgical approach). Hemorrhage (posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduodenal artery), gastric outlet obstruction, perforation (usually anterior ulcers), intractable pain. ■A rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duodenum and/or pancreas that lead to oversecretion of gastrin. ■↑ gastrin results in the production of high levels of gastric acid by the gastric mucosa, leading to recurrent/intractable ulcers in the stomach and duodenum (may occur more distally). In 20% of cases, gastrinomas are associated with MEN 1 (pancreas, pituitary, and parathyroid tumors). Hx/PE: Patients may present with unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain as well as with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, and GI bleeding.
Evidence is accumulating that these patches of what appears to be Barrett’s in the cardia have a similar malignant potential as in the longer segments, and are precursors for carcinoma of the cardia.The long-term relief of symptoms remains the primary rea-son for performing antireflux surgery in patients with BE. Heal-ing of esophageal mucosal injury and the prevention of disease progression are important secondary goals. In this regard, patients with BE are no different than the broader population of patients with gastroesophageal reflux. They should be con-sidered for antireflux surgery when patient data suggest severe disease or predict the need for long-term medical management. Most patients with BE are symptomatic. Although it has been argued that some patients with BE may not have symptoms, careful history taking will reveal the presence of symptoms in most, if not all, patients.Patients with BE have a spectrum of disease ranging from visually identifiable but short segments, to long segments of classic BE. In general, however, they represent a relatively severe stage of gastroesophageal reflux, usually with markedly increased esophageal acid exposure, deficient LES characteris-tics, poor esophageal body function, and a high prevalence of duodenogastroesophageal reflux. Gastric hypersecretion occurs in 44% of patients. Most will require long-term PPI therapy for relief of symptoms and control of coexistent esophageal muco-sal injury. Given such profound deficits in esophageal physi-ology, antireflux surgery is an excellent means of long-term control of reflux symptoms for most patients with BE.The typical complications in BE include ulceration in the columnar-lined segment, stricture formation, and a dysplasia-cancer sequence. Barrett’s ulceration is unlike the erosive ulceration of reflux esophagitis in that it more closely resem-bles peptic ulceration in the stomach or duodenum, and has the same propensity to bleed, penetrate, or perforate. Fortunately, this complication occurs very rarely. The strictures found in BE occur at the squamocolumnar junction, and they are typically higher than peptic strictures in the absence of BE. Ulceration and stricture in association with BE were commonly reported before 1975, but with the advent of potent acid suppression medication, they have become less common. In contrast, the complication of adenocarcinoma developing in Barrett’s mucosa has become more common.
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified. A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up. The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis. The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made (squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging procedure. Staging of any malignancy is important because it determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third esophageal tumor. The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to the liver. Bleeding was the cause of the anemia. Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably friable, and with the passage of digested material across the tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs.
Monitor the patient’s hematocrit and BP and treat with IV hydration, transfusion, IV PPIs, endoscopy, and surgery as needed for complications. If perforation is likely, emergent surgery is indicated. Pharmacologic:

Involves protecting the mucosa, decreasing acid production, and eradicating H. pylori infection. Treat mild disease with antacids or with sucralfate, bismuth, and misoprostol (a prostaglandin analog) for mucosal protection. PPIs or H2 receptor antagonists may be used to ↓ acid secretion. Patients with confirmed H. pylori infection should receive triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole). Discontinue use of exacerbating agents. Patients with recurrent or severe disease may require chronic symptomatic therapy. Endoscopy and surgery:

Patients with symptomatic gastric ulcers for > 2 months that are refractory to medical therapy should have either endoscopy or an upper GI series with barium to rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. Refractory cases may require a surgical procedure such as parietal cell vagotomy (the most selective and preferred surgical approach). Hemorrhage (posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduodenal artery), gastric outlet obstruction, perforation (usually anterior ulcers), intractable pain. ■A rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duodenum and/or pancreas that lead to oversecretion of gastrin. ■↑ gastrin results in the production of high levels of gastric acid by the gastric mucosa, leading to recurrent/intractable ulcers in the stomach and duodenum (may occur more distally). In 20% of cases, gastrinomas are associated with MEN 1 (pancreas, pituitary, and parathyroid tumors). Hx/PE: Patients may present with unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain as well as with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, and GI bleeding.
Studies have shown that a Blatchford score of 1 or less, or a Rockall score of 2 or less, identifies patients who are very unlikely to be suffering from life-threatening upper GI bleeding. The shorter modified Blatchford score may be just as useful (BUN, Hgb, pulse, BP; maximal score 16).111 High-risk patients benefit from endoscopic therapy to stop the bleeding, while low-risk patients with low-risk lesions can be promptly discharged and treated as outpatients. The most common endoscopic hemostatic modalities used are injection with epinephrine and electrocautery. In a case with exposed vessel, mechanical hemostasis using clips is useful to control the bleeding.112 Biopsy should be performed to evaluate for H pylori infection. Persistent bleeding or rebleeding after endo-scopic therapy is an indication for repeat endoscopic treatment. Surgery should be considered after two endoscopic failures. Elderly patients and patients with multiple comorbidities do not tolerate repeated episodes of hemodynamically significant hemorrhage, and they may benefit from early elective opera-tion after initially successful endoscopic treatment, especially if they have a high-risk ulcer.Planned surgery under controlled circumstances often yields better outcomes than emergent surgery. Deep bleeding ulcers on the posterior duodenal bulb or lesser gastric curvature are high-risk lesions because they often erode large arteries less amenable to nonoperative treatment, and early operation should be considered.Perforated peptic ulcer usually presents as an acute abdo-men. The patient can often give the exact time of onset of the excruciating abdominal pain. Initially, a chemical peritonitis develops from the gastric and/or duodenal secretions, but within hours a bacterial peritonitis supervenes. The patient is in obvi-ous distress, and the abdominal examination shows peritoneal signs. Usually, marked involuntary guarding and rebound ten-derness is evoked by a gentle examination. Upright chest X-ray shows free air in about 80% of patients (Fig. 26-32). Once the diagnosis has been made, the patient is given analgesia and antibiotics, resuscitated with isotonic fluid, and taken to the operating room.
(Repro duced, with permission, from Kasper DL et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: 1804.) For partial obstruction, supportive care may be sufficient and should include NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and Foley catheterization to monitor ﬂ uid status. Surgery is required in cases of complete SBO, vascular compromise (necrotic bowel), or symptoms lasting > 3 days without resolution. Exploratory laparotomy may be performed with lysis of adhesions, resection of necrotic bowel, and evaluation for stricture, IBD, and hernias. There is a 2% mortality risk for a nonstrangulated SBO; strangulated SBO is associated with up to a 25% mortality rate depending on the time between diagnosis and treatment. A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern. Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction. Risk factors include recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobility, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, DM, and medications that slow GI motility (e.g., anticholinergics, opioids). Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements. Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds. A rectal exam is required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly patients. Diffusely distended loops of small and large bowel are seen on supine AXR with air-ﬂuid levels on upright view. A Gastrografin study can rule out partial obstruction; CT can rule out neo-In diagnosing ileus, look for plasms.
In the colon, tumors with upregulation of this gene have suppressed apoptosis, more angiogenesis, and higher metastatic potential. Gastric tumors that overexpress COX-2 are more aggressive. Recently, a germline mutation in the CDH1 gene encoding E-cadherin was shown to be associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Prophylactic total gastrectomy should be consid-ered in patients with these mutations.142Premalignant Conditions of the Stomach Figure 26-52 shows the prevalence of some premalignant conditions associated with the development of early gastric cancer in a series of 1900 cases from Tokyo. By far the most common precancerous lesion is atrophic gastritis. There is a growing appreciation of the impor-tant influence of the chronic inflammatory milieu on the genome of mucosal cells. Chronic inflammation leads to both genetic Acute pangastritisChronic pangastritisDecreased acidGastric cancerChronic antral gastritisDecreased SSTIncreased gastrinIncreased acidDUFigure 26-50. Helicobacter, gastritis, and the pathogenesis of duo-denal ulcer (DU) or gastric cancer.Figure 26-51. Gastric carcinogenesis. (Reproduced with permission from Yamada T, Alpers DH, Laine L, et al: Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003. )NormalDysplasiaCancerIntestinal metaplasiaAtrophic gastritisChronic superficial gastritisH pyloriDiet low in vitamin C, EHigh-salt dietBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114101/03/19   7:12 PM 1142SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIand epigenetic changes in mucosal cells, which in the stomach leads to the development of gastritis-associated cancer.143,144Polyps Benign gastric polyps are classified as neoplastic (ade-noma and fundic gland polyps) or nonneoplastic (hyperplastic polyp, inflammatory polyp, hamartomatous polyp).145 In general, inflammatory and hamartomatous polyps have little or no malig-nant potential. Fundic gland polyps, commonly seen in patients on long-term PPI therapy, are not premalignant, but in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), dysplasia in these lesions is not uncommon, and there are numerous reports of gas-tric cancer arising in a background of fundic gland polyposis in this setting. Hyperplastic polyps usually occur in the setting of chronic inflammation. Large hyperplastic polyps (>2 cm) may harbor dysplasia or carcinoma in situ, and gastric cancer may develop remote from the hyperplastic polyp in an area of associ-ated chronic inflammation.
As stated earlier, rheumatologic disease may manifest primarily as lung disease. Owing to this association, particular attention should be paid to joint and skin examination. Clubbing can be found in many lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, IPF, and lung cancer. Cyanosis is seen in hypoxemic respiratory disorders that result in >5 g of deoxygenated hemoglobin/dL. The sequence of studies is dictated by the clinician’s differential diagnosis, as determined by the history and physical examination. Acute respiratory symptoms are often evaluated with multiple tests performed at the same time in order to diagnose any life-threatening diseases rapidly (e.g., pulmonary embolism or multilobar pneumonia). In contrast, chronic dyspnea and cough can be evaluated in a more protracted, stepwise fashion. Pulmonary Function Testing (See also Chap. 307) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is an effort-dependent test used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis. A diminished-forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as <70% of the predicted value) is diagnostic of obstruction. In addition to measuring FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop (which is effort-independent). A plateau of the inspiratory and expiratory curves suggests large-airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively. Spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including measurement of lung volumes and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity <80% of the predicted value for a patient’s age, race, sex, and height defines restrictive pathophysiology.
Presents with cough, episodic wheezing, dyspnea, and/or chest tightness. Symptoms often worsen at night or early in the morning. Exam reveals wheezing, prolonged expiratory duration (↓ I/E ratio), accessory muscle use, tachypnea, tachycardia, ↓ breath sounds (late sign), ↓O2 saturation (late sign), hyperresonance, and possible pulsus paradoxus. ■ABGs: Mild hypoxia and respiratory alkalosis. Normalizing PCO2, respiratory acidosis, and more severe hypoxia in an acute exacerbation warrant close observation, as they may indicate fatigue and impending respiratory failure. F IGU R E 2.1 5-1. Lung volumes in the interpretation of pulmonary function tests. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gomella LG et al. Clinician’s Pocket Reference, 11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 18-1.) T AB LE 2.1 5-1. Obstructive vs. Restrictive Lung Diseasea a FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC = forced vital capacity. Spirometry/PFTs: ↓ FEV1/FVC; peak fow is diminished acutely; ↑ RV and total lung capacity (TLC).
It may also occur in patients on respirators who have partial bronchiolar obstruction or in individuals with a perforating injury (e.g., a fractured rib). When the interstitial air gets into the subcutaneous tissue, the patient may literally blow up like a balloon, with marked swelling of the head and neck and crackling crepitation over the chest (subcutaneous emphysema). In most instances the air is resorbed spontaneously after the site of entry seals. Emphysemaisachronicobstructiveairwaydiseasecharacterizedbyenlargementofairspacesdistaltoterminalbronchioles. Subtypesincludecentriacinar(mostcommon:smoking-related),panacinar(seeninα1-anti-trypsindeficiency),distalacinar,andirregular. Smokingandinhaledpollutantscauseongoingaccumulationofinflammatorycells,whicharethesourceofproteasessuchaselastasesthatirreversiblydamagealveolarwalls. Patientswithuncomplicatedemphysemapresentwithincreasedchestvolumes,dyspnea,andrelativelynormalbloodoxygenationatrest(“pinkpuffers”). Mostpatientswithemphysemaalsohavesignsandsymptomsofconcurrentchronicbronchitis,sincecigarettesmokingisariskfactorforboth. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Chronic bronchitis is diagnosed on clinical grounds: it is defined by the presence of a persistent productive cough for at least 3 consecutive months in at least 2 consecutive years. It is common among cigarette smokers and urban dwellers in smog-ridden cities; some studies indicate that 20% to 25% of men in the 40to 65-year-old age group have the disease. In early stages of the disease, the cough raises mucoid sputum, but airflow is not obstructed. Some patients with chronic bronchitis have evidence of hyperresponsive airways, with intermittent bronchospasm and wheezing (asthmatic bronchitis), while other bronchitic patients, especially heavy smokers, develop chronic outflow obstruction, usually with associated emphysema (COPD). The distinctive feature of chronic bronchitis is hypersecretion of mucus, beginning in the large airways. Although the most important cause is cigarette smoking, other air pollutants, such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide, may contribute. These environmental irritants induce hypertrophy of mucous glands in the trachea and bronchi as well as an increase in mucin-secreting goblet cells in the epithelial surfaces of smaller bronchi and bronchioles.
The patient is asked to first breathe normally into the spirometer, and the volume of air (the tidal volume [VT]) that is moved into and out of the lungs with each quiet breath is measured. The patient then inhales maximally and exhales forcefully and completely, and the volume of exhaled air is measured. The total volume of exhaled air, from a maximal inspiration to a maximal exhalation, is the vital capacity (VC). Residual volume (RV) is the air remaining in the lungs after a complete exhalation. TLC is the sum of VC and RV; it is the total volume of air contained in the lungs at the end of maximal inspiration, and it includes the volume of air that can be moved (VC) and the volume of air that is always present (trapped) in the lungs (RV). Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the volume of air in the lungs at the end of exhalation during quiet breathing and is also called the resting volume of the lungs. FRC is composed of RV and the expiratory reserve volume (the volume of air that can be exhaled from FRC to RV). Measurement of Lung Volumes

RV and TLC can be measured in two ways: by helium dilution and by body plethysmography. Both methods are used clinically and provide valuable information about lung function and lung disease. The helium dilution technique is the older and simpler method, but it is often less accurate than body plethysmography, which requires sophisticated and expensive equipment. 21.1

Pulmonaryfunctiontestsareoftenusedtodiagnoseabnormalitiesinlungfunctionandtoassesstheprogressionoflungdisease.Theycandistinguishthetwomajortypesofpulmonarypathophysiologicprocesses:obstructivelungdiseasesandrestrictivelungdiseases.Forexample,innormalindividuals,theratioofRVtoTLCislessthan 0.25.Thusinahealthyindividual,approximately25%ofthetotalvolumeofairinthelungistrapped.Inobstructive pulmonary diseases, anelevationinRV/TLCratioissecondarytoanincreaseinRVoutofproportiontoanyincreaseinTLC.Incontrast,inrestrictive lung diseases, theelevationintheRV/TLCratioiscausedbyadecreaseinTLC. In normal individuals, the FRC measured by helium dilution and the FRC measured by plethysmography are the same (

Table 21.1 ). This is not true in individuals with lung disease. The FRC measured by helium dilution is the volume of gas in the lung that communicates with the •Fig. 21.4 Measurement of Lung Volume by Helium Dilution.
Generally 2° to chronic bronchitis or emphysema, which are distinguished as follows:

Chronic bronchitis: Productive cough for > 3 months per year for two consecutive years. Emphysema: Terminal airway destruction and dilation that may be 2° to smoking (centrilobular) or to α1-antitrypsin deficiency (panlobular). Symptoms are minimal or nonspecifc until the disease is advanced. The clinical spectrum includes the following (most patients are a combination of the two phenotypes):

Emphysema (“pink puffer”): Dyspnea, pursed lips, minimal cough, ↓ breath sounds, late hypercarbia/hypoxia. Patients often have a thin, wasted appearance. Pure emphysematous patients tend to have few reactive episodes between exacerbations. aspiration Or 2° to foreign bodies Necrotizing pneumonia Chemical corrosive smoking cessation, pneumococcal and inﬂ uenza vaccines)

Dilators (β2-agonists, anticholinergics)

In COPD patients with chronic hypercapnia, high concentrations of O2 may suppress patients’ hypoxic respiratory drive. Supplemental oxygen titrated to > 90% SaO2 for > 15 hours a day and smoking cessation are the only interventions proven to improve survival in patients with COPD. ■Chronic bronchitis (“blue bloater”): Cyanosis with mild dyspnea; productive cough. Patients are often overweight with peripheral edema, rhonchi, and early signs of hypercarbia/hypoxia. Look for the classic barrel chest, use of accessory chest muscles, JVD, end-expiratory wheezing, and muffed breath sounds. CXR: Hyperinﬂ ated lungs, ↓ lung markings with fat diaphragms, and a thin-appearing heart and mediastinum. Parenchymal bullae or subpleural blebs (pathognomonic of emphysema) are also seen (see Figure 2.15-3). PFTs: ↓ FEV1/FVC; normal or ↓ FVC; normal or ↑ TLC (emphysema, asthma); ↓ DLCO (in emphysema). ABGs: Hypoxemia with acute or chronic respiratory acidosis (↑ PCO2).
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Eye poking is particularly concerning; it occurs more frequently among children with visual impairment. Multiple movements may be combined (e.g., cocking the head, rocking the torso, waving a small string repetitively in front of the face). Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a day, lasting a few seconds to several minutes or longer. Frequency can vary from many occurrences in a single day to several weeks elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when the individual is engrossed in other activities, when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored. Criterion A requires that the movements be “apparently” purposeless. However, some functions may be served by the movements. For example, stereotypic movements might reduce anxiety in response to external stressors. Criterion B states that the stereotypic movements interfere with social, academic, or other activities and, in some children, may result in self—injury (or would if protective mea- sures were not used). If self—injury is present, it should be coded using the specifier. Onset of stereotypic movements is in the early developmental period (Criterion C). Criterion D states that the repetitive, stereotyped behavior in stereotypic movement disorder is not at- tributable to the‘physiological effects of a substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by another neurodevelopmental or mental disorder. The presence of stereotypic movements may indicate an undetected neurodevelopmental problem, espe- cially in children ages 1—3 years. Simple stereotypic movements (e.g., rocking) are common in young typically developing chil- dren. Complex stereotypic movements are much less common (occurring in approximately 3%—4%).
Cross out all the a’s on a printed page; count forward and backward; say the months of the year forward and backward; spell world forward and then backward. Verbal trail making (reciting alternating letters of the alphabet and their ordinal place, i.e., A-1, B-2, C-3, D-…). 2. Insight (patient’s replies to questions about the chief symptoms): What is your difficulty? Are you ill? When did your illness begin? 3. Orientation (knowledge of personal identity and present situation): What is your name, address, telephone number? What is your occupation? Are you married? a. Place: What is the name of the place where you are now (building, city, state)? How did you get here? What floor is it on? Where is the bathroom?
A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease. Treatment for mild and severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Sudden onset of mental status changes, emesis, and liver dysfunction after taking aspirin. A child has loss of red light reﬂex. Diagnosis? Neuroblastoma. Esophageal atresia with distal TEF (85%). Unable to pass NG tube. Mild illness and/or low-grade fever, current antibiotic therapy, and prematurity. Ophthalmologic exam, CT, and MRI. CF or Hirschsprung’s disease. Duodenal atresia. Correct metabolic abnormalities. Then correct pyloric stenosis with pyloromyotomy.
If the individual is of impaired capacity and unable to complete the form (e.g., an individual with dementia), a know]- edgeable adult informant may complete this measure. The measure was found to be clin- ically useful and to have good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials that were conducted in adult clinical samples across the United States and in Canada. The parent/guardian-rated version of the measure (for children ages 6—17) consists of 25 questions that assess 12 psychiatric domains, including depression, anger, irritability, mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, inattention, suicidal ideation/attempt, psychosis, sleep disturbance, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, and substance use (Table 2). Each item asks the parent or guardian to rate how much (or how often) his or her child has been bothered by the specific psychiatric symptom during the past 2 weeks. The measure was also found to be clinically useful and to have good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials that were conducted in pediatric clinical samples across the United States. For children ages 11—17, along with the parent/guardian rating of the child’s symptoms, the clinician may consider having the child complete the child-rated version of the measure. The child—rated version of the measure can be found online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5. Scoring and interpretation. On the adult self—rated version of the measure, each item is rated on a 5-point scale (0=none or not at all; 1=slight or rare, less than a day or two; 2=mild or several days; 3=moderate or more than half the days; and 4=severe or nearly every day). The score on each item within a domain should be reviewed. However, a rating of mild (i.e., 2) or greater on any item within a domain, except for substance use, suicidal ideation, and psychosis, may serve as a guide for additional inquiry and follow-up to determine if a more detailed assessment is necessary, which may include the Level 2 cross-cutting symptom as- sessment for the domain (see Table 2). For substance use, suicidal ideation, and psychosis, a

TABLE 1 Adult DSM-5 Self-Rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure: 13 domains, thresholds for further inquiry, and associated DSM-5

Threshold to guide DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom

I. Depression Mild or greater Level 2—Depression—Adult (PROMIS

II. Anger Mild or greater Level 2—Anger—Adult (PROMIS Emo— 111. Mania Mild or greater Level 2—Mania—Adult(A1tman Self-Rating

IV. Anxiety Mild or greater Level 2—Anxiety—Adult (PROMIS

V. Somatic symptoms Mild or greater Level 2—Somatic Symptom—Adult (Patient

VI.
Duodenal ulcer is about twice as common in men compared to women, but the incidence of gastric ulcer is similar in men and women. On average, gastric ulcer patients are older than duodenal ulcer patients, and the incidence is increasing in the elderly, perhaps because of increasing NSAID and aspirin.DiagnosisIn the young patient with dyspepsia and without alarm symp-toms, it may be appropriate to initiate empirical PPI therapy for PUD without upper endoscopy or upper GI series. NSAIDs and aspirin should be stopped if the patient is taking these drugs, and Helicobacter should be ruled out with testing and treated if pres-ent. It is prudent to discuss with the patient the small possibility of an alternative diagnosis, including malignancy, even if symp-toms improve with the initiation of empiric therapy. Patients with persistent dyspepsia, and those who cannot stop NSAIDs or aspirin for health reasons should have an upper endoscopy, and all patients, regardless of age, should have this study if any alarm symptoms (see Table 26-5) are present. A double-contrast upper GI X-ray study may be useful. Once an ulcer has been confirmed endoscopically or radiologically, obvious possible causes (Helicobacter, NSAIDs, gastrinoma, cancer) should always be considered. All gastric ulcers should be adequately biopsied, and any sites of gastritis should be biopsied to rule out H pylori, and for histologic evaluation. Additional testing for H pylori may be indicated. It is reasonable to test all peptic IIIIIIIVVNSAID-inducedAcid hypersecretionFigure 26-30. Modified Johnson classification for gastric ulcer. I. Lesser curve, incisura. II. Body of stomach, incisura + duodenal ulcer (active or healed).
Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior. APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Studies have shown that a Blatchford score of 1 or less, or a Rockall score of 2 or less, identifies patients who are very unlikely to be suffering from life-threatening upper GI bleeding. The shorter modified Blatchford score may be just as useful (BUN, Hgb, pulse, BP; maximal score 16).111 High-risk patients benefit from endoscopic therapy to stop the bleeding, while low-risk patients with low-risk lesions can be promptly discharged and treated as outpatients. The most common endoscopic hemostatic modalities used are injection with epinephrine and electrocautery. In a case with exposed vessel, mechanical hemostasis using clips is useful to control the bleeding.112 Biopsy should be performed to evaluate for H pylori infection. Persistent bleeding or rebleeding after endo-scopic therapy is an indication for repeat endoscopic treatment. Surgery should be considered after two endoscopic failures. Elderly patients and patients with multiple comorbidities do not tolerate repeated episodes of hemodynamically significant hemorrhage, and they may benefit from early elective opera-tion after initially successful endoscopic treatment, especially if they have a high-risk ulcer.Planned surgery under controlled circumstances often yields better outcomes than emergent surgery. Deep bleeding ulcers on the posterior duodenal bulb or lesser gastric curvature are high-risk lesions because they often erode large arteries less amenable to nonoperative treatment, and early operation should be considered.Perforated peptic ulcer usually presents as an acute abdo-men. The patient can often give the exact time of onset of the excruciating abdominal pain. Initially, a chemical peritonitis develops from the gastric and/or duodenal secretions, but within hours a bacterial peritonitis supervenes. The patient is in obvi-ous distress, and the abdominal examination shows peritoneal signs. Usually, marked involuntary guarding and rebound ten-derness is evoked by a gentle examination. Upright chest X-ray shows free air in about 80% of patients (Fig. 26-32). Once the diagnosis has been made, the patient is given analgesia and antibiotics, resuscitated with isotonic fluid, and taken to the operating room.
Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens. For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine). Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes.
Monitor the patient’s hematocrit and BP and treat with IV hydration, transfusion, IV PPIs, endoscopy, and surgery as needed for complications. If perforation is likely, emergent surgery is indicated. Pharmacologic:

Involves protecting the mucosa, decreasing acid production, and eradicating H. pylori infection. Treat mild disease with antacids or with sucralfate, bismuth, and misoprostol (a prostaglandin analog) for mucosal protection. PPIs or H2 receptor antagonists may be used to ↓ acid secretion. Patients with confirmed H. pylori infection should receive triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole). Discontinue use of exacerbating agents. Patients with recurrent or severe disease may require chronic symptomatic therapy. Endoscopy and surgery:

Patients with symptomatic gastric ulcers for > 2 months that are refractory to medical therapy should have either endoscopy or an upper GI series with barium to rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. Refractory cases may require a surgical procedure such as parietal cell vagotomy (the most selective and preferred surgical approach). Hemorrhage (posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduodenal artery), gastric outlet obstruction, perforation (usually anterior ulcers), intractable pain. ■A rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duodenum and/or pancreas that lead to oversecretion of gastrin. ■↑ gastrin results in the production of high levels of gastric acid by the gastric mucosa, leading to recurrent/intractable ulcers in the stomach and duodenum (may occur more distally). In 20% of cases, gastrinomas are associated with MEN 1 (pancreas, pituitary, and parathyroid tumors). Hx/PE: Patients may present with unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain as well as with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, and GI bleeding.
Regardless a variety of primary immunodeficiencies have been treated with HSCT (see Table 76-1)

Rejection of the grafted cells is the first potential complication of HSCT and depends on the immunocompetence of thepatient, the degree of MHC incompatibility, and the number of cells administered. Preconditioning with myeloablativedrugs, such as busulfan and cyclophosphamide, can preventgraft rejection but may be complicated by pulmonary toxicity and by venoocclusive disease of the liver, which resultsfrom damage to the hepatic vascular endothelium and canbe fatal. Myeloablation results in anemia, leukopenia, andthrombocytopenia, making patients susceptible to infectionand bleeding disorders. Neutropenic precautions should bemaintained and patients supported with red blood cell andplatelet transfusions until the red blood cell, platelet, and neutrophil lineages engraft. Reduced intensity preconditioninghas been used recently to prevent graft rejection and decreasethe adverse effects of myeloablation. B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder can develop after T-cell depleted bone marrowtransplantation. GVHD can arise from an MHC-mismatched transplantation or from mismatch in minor histocompatibility antigens that are not tested for before transplantation.T-cell depletion of haploidentical bone marrow reduces the risk of GVHD. Patients with SCID transplanted withT-cell–depleted haploidentical bone marrow do not usuallydevelop severe GVHD. Acute GVHD begins 6 or more daysafter transplantation and can result from transfusion of non-irradiated blood products in patients with no T-cell function.Acute GVHD presents with fever, skin rash, and severe diarrhea. Patients develop a high, unrelenting fever; a morbilliform maculopapular erythematous rash that is painful andpruritic; hepatosplenomegaly and abnormal liver functiontests; and nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and waterydiarrhea. Acute GVHD is staged from grades 1 to 4, depending on the degree of skin, fever, gastrointestinal, and liverinvolvement. Chronic GVHD results from acute GVHD lasting longer than 100 days and can develop without acuteGVHD or after acute GVHD has resolved. Chronic GVHD is characterized by skin lesions (hyperkeratosis, reticularhyperpigmentation, fibrosis, and atrophy with ulceration),limitation of joint movement, interstitial pneumonitis, andimmune dysregulation with autoantibody and immune complex formation. Klein C: Genetic defects in severe congenital neutropenia: emerging insights into life and death of human neutrophil granulocytes, Annu Rev Immunol 29:399–413, 2011

Ricklin D, Hajishengallis G, Yang K, et al: Complement: a key system for immune surveillance and homeostasis, Nat Immunol 11:785–797, 2010

Szabolcs P, Cavazzana-Calvo M, Fischer A, et al: Bone marrow trans plantation for primary immunodeficiency diseases, Pediatr Clin N Am 57:207–237, 2010

Waleed A, Bousfiha A, Casanova JL, et al: Primary immunodeficiency diseases: an update on the classification from the International Union of ciency, Front Immunol 2:1–26, 2011

Asriani M. Chiu 14

Atopy is a result of a complex interaction between multiple genes and environmental factors. It implies specific IgE-mediated diseases, including allergic rhinitis, asthma, and atopic dermatitis.
Myeloma cells tend to become resistant to drugs by an MDR gene mechanism, and autologous stem cell transplantation may be used to support more intensive doses of chemotherapy. A clonal disorder of B cells that leads to a malignant monoclonal gammopathy. Elevated levels of IgM result in hyperviscosity syndrome, coagulation abnormalities, cryoglobulinemia, cold agglutinin disease (leading to autoimmune hemolytic anemia), and amyloidosis. Tissue is infiltrated by IgM and neoplastic plasma cells. A chronic, indolent disease of the elderly. Presents with nonspecific symptoms of lethargy and weight loss along with Raynaud’s phenomenon from cryoglobulinemia. Patients complain of neurologic problems ranging from mental status changes to sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy and blurry vision. Organomegaly and organ dysfunction affecting the skin, GI tract, kidneys, and lungs are also seen. As with multiple myeloma, MGUS is a precursor to disease. Labs show elevated ESR, uric acid, LDH, and alkaline phosphatase. Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate are required to establish the diagnosis. Marrow shows abnormal plasma cells, classically with Dutcher bodies (PASIgM deposits around the nucleus). Serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation are also used. Excess immunoglobulin is removed with plasmapheresis; underlying lymphoma is treated with chemotherapy. A generic term referring to extracellular deposition of protein fibrils.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
The attendant hypercalcemia can give rise to neurologic manifestations, such as confusion, weakness, and lethargy, and contributes to renal dysfunction. Decreased production of normal immunoglobulins sets the stage for recurrent bacterial infections. Of great significance is renal insufficiency, which trails only infections as a cause of death. Renal failure occurs in up to 50% of patients and is associated strongly with the presence and level of Bence Jones proteinuria, highlighting the importance of free light chains in renal disease. Certain light chains also are prone to cause amyloidosis of the AL type (Chapter 5), which can exacerbate renal dysfunction and deposit in other tissues as well. http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 12.19 Multiplemyeloma.(A)Radiographoftheskull,lateralview.Thesharplypunched-outbonedefectsaremostobviousinthecalvaria.(B)Bonemarrowaspirate.Normalmarrowcellsarelargelyreplacedbyplasmacells,includingatypicalformswithmultiplenuclei,prominentnucleoli,andcyto-plasmicdropletscontainingimmunoglobulin. Laboratory analyses typically show increased levels of immunoglobulins in the blood and/or Bence Jones proteins in the urine. Free light chains and an M protein component are observed together in 60% to 70% of cases, whereas in about 20% of patients only free light chains are present. Around 1% of myelomas are nonsecretory; hence, the absence of detectable M component does not completely exclude the diagnosis. The diagnosis rests on radiologic and laboratory findings. It can be strongly suspected when imaging studies show typical bone lesions, but definitive diagnosis requires a bone marrow examination. Marrow involvement often gives rise to a normocytic normochromic anemia, sometimes accompanied by moderate leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. The prognosis is variable. Patients with multiple bony lesions, if untreated, rarely survive for more than 6 to 12 months, whereas patients with “smoldering myeloma” may be asymptomatic for many years.
Ironically, although the plasma has elevated levels of immunoglobulin owing to the presence of an M protein, the production of functional antibodies often is profoundly depressed. As a result, patients are at high risk for bacterial infections. • Renal dysfunction stems from several pathologic effects of myeloma that may occur alone or in combination. Most important are obstructive proteinaceous casts, which often form in the distal convoluted tubules and the collecting ducts. The casts consist mostly of Bence Jones proteins along with variable amounts of complete immunoglobulin, Tamm-Horsfall protein, and albumin. Light chain deposition in the glomeruli or the interstitium, either as amyloid or linear deposits, also may contribute to renal damage. Completing the assault is hypercalcemia, which may lead to dehydration and renal stones, and frequent bouts of bacterial pyelonephritis, which stem in part from the hypogammaglobulinemia. MORPHOLOGYMultiplemyelomausuallymanifestswithmultifocal destructive skeletal lesions thatmostcommonlyinvolvethevertebralcolumn,ribs,skull,pelvis,femur,clavicle,andscapula. Thelesionsariseinthemedullarycavity,erodecancellousbone,andprogressivelydestroythebonecortex.Bonedestructionoftenleadstopathologic fractures, mostfrequentlyinthevertebralcolumnorfemur.Thebonelesionsusuallyappearaspunched-out defects 1to4cmindiameter(

Fig.12.19A ).Microscopicexaminationofthemarrowshowsincreasednumbersofplasmacells,whichusuallyconstitutegreaterthan30%ofthecellularity.Myelomacellsmayresemblenormalplasmacellsbutmoreoftenshowabnormalfeaturessuchasprominentnucleoliorabnormalcytoplasmicinclusionscontainingimmunoglobulin(

Fig.12.19B ).Withdiseaseprogression,myelomacellsmayspreadtothevisceraandothersofttissuesites,andinterminalstagesaleukemicpicturemayemerge. Renalinvolvement(myeloma nephrosis) isassociatedwithproteinaceouscastsconsistingmostlyofBenceJonesproteinsthatobstructthedistalconvolutedtubulesandthecollectingducts.Multinucleategiantcellsderivedfrommacrophagesusuallysurroundthecasts.Veryoftentheepithelial cells adjacent to the casts become necrotic or atrophic owingtothetoxiceffectsofBenceJonesproteins.Othercommonpathologicprocessesinvolvingthekidneyincludemetastatic calcification,stemmingfromboneresorptionandhypercalcemia;light chain (AL) amyloidosis,involvingtherenalglomeruliandvesselwalls;andbacterial pyelonephritis, secondarytotheincreasedsusceptibilitytobacterialinfections.Rarely,infiltratesofneoplasticplasmacellsareseenintherenalinterstitium. Clinical Features. Clinical findings stem mainly from (1) the effects of plasma cells on the skeleton; (2) the production of excessive immunoglobulins, which often have abnormal physicochemical properties; and (3) the suppression of humoral immunity. Bone resorption often leads to pathologic fractures and chronic pain. The attendant hypercalcemia can give rise to neurologic manifestations, such as confusion, weakness, and lethargy, and contributes to renal dysfunction. Decreased production of normal immunoglobulins sets the stage for recurrent bacterial infections.
Used to diagnose chromosomal imbalances (eg, autosomal trisomies, sex chromosome disorders). Fluorescent DNA or RNA probe binds to specific gene site of interest on chromosomes (arrows in A point to abnormalities in a cancer cell, whose karyotype is seen above; each fluorescent color represents a chromosome-specific probe). Used for specific localization of genes and direct visualization of chromosomal anomalies at the molecular level. Microdeletion—no fluorescence on a chromosome compared to fluorescence at the same locus on the second copy of that chromosome. Translocation—fluorescence signal that corresponds to one chromosome is found in a different chromosome (two white arrows in A show fragments of chromosome 17 that have translocated to chromosome 19). Duplication—a second copy of a chromosome, resulting in a trisomy or tetrasomy (two blue arrows show duplicated chromosomes 8, resulting in a tetrasomy). Molecular cloning Production of a recombinant DNA molecule in a bacterial host. Steps: 1. Isolate eukaryotic mRNA (post-RNA processing) of interest. 2. Add reverse transcriptase (an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) to produce complementary DNA (cDNA, lacks introns). 3. Insert cDNA fragments into bacterial plasmids containing antibiotic resistance genes. 4. Transform (insert) recombinant plasmid into bacteria.
As we shall see in Chapter 7, there are examples of regulation at each step from gene to protein. 5˜3˜DNA introns exons INITIATION OF TRANSCRIPTION CLEAVAGE, POLYADENYLATION, AND TERMINATION EXPORT CAPPING, ELONGATION SPLICING AAAA mRNA NUCLEUS CYTOSOL cap poly-A tail

Figure 6–87 The production of a protein by a eukaryotic cell. The final level of each protein in a eukaryotic cell depends upon the efficiency of each step depicted. The translation of the nucleotide sequence of an mRNA molecule into protein takes place in the cytosol on a large ribonucleoprotein assembly called a ribosome. Each amino acid used for protein synthesis is first attached to a tRNA molecule that recognizes, by complementary base-pair interactions, a particular set of three nucleotides (codons) in the mRNA. As an mRNA is threaded through a ribosome, its sequence of nucleotides is then read from one end to the other in sets of three according to the genetic code. To initiate translation, a small ribosomal subunit binds to the mRNA molecule at a start codon (AUG) that is recognized by a unique initiator tRNA molecule. A large ribosomal subunit then binds to complete the ribosome and begin protein synthesis. During this phase, aminoacyl-tRNAs—each bearing a specific amino acid—bind sequentially to the appropriate codons in mRNA through complementary base-pairing between tRNA anticodons and mRNA codons. Each amino acid is added to the C-terminal end of the growing polypeptide in four sequential steps: aminoacyl-tRNA binding, followed by peptide bond formation, followed by two ribosome translocation steps. Elongation factors use GTP hydrolysis both to drive these reactions forward and to improve the accuracy of amino acid selection. The mRNA molecule progresses codon by codon through the ribosome in the 5ʹ-to-3ʹ direction until it reaches one of three stop codons. A release factor then binds to the ribosome, terminating translation and releasing the completed polypeptide. Eukaryotic and bacterial ribosomes are closely related, despite differences in the number and size of their rRNA and protein components. The rRNA has the dominant role in translation, determining the overall structure of the ribosome, forming the binding sites for the tRNAs, matching the tRNAs to codons in the mRNA, and creating the active site of the peptidyl transferase enzyme that links amino acids together during translation.
1. Insertion of a single nucleotide near the end of the coding sequence. 2. Removal of a single nucleotide near the beginning of the coding sequence. 3. Deletion of three consecutive nucleotides in the middle of the coding sequence. 4. Substitution of one nucleotide for another in the middle of the coding sequence. 6–11 Prokaryotes and eukaryotes both protect against the dangers of translating broken mRNAs. What dangers do partial mRNAs pose for the cell? 6–12 Both hsp60-like and hsp70 molecular chaperones share an affinity for exposed hydrophobic patches on proteins, using them as indicators of incomplete folding. Why do you suppose hydrophobic patches serve as critical signals for the folding status of a protein? 6–13 Most proteins require molecular chaperones to assist in their correct folding. How do you suppose the chaperones themselves manage to fold correctly? 6–14 What is so special about RNA that it is hypothesized to be an evolutionary precursor to DNA and protein?
8–9 Hybridoma technology allows one to generate monoclonal antibodies to virtually any protein. Why is it, then, that genetically tagging proteins with epitopes is such a commonly used technique, especially since an epitope tag has the potential to interfere with the function of the protein? 8–10 How many copies of a protein need to be present in a cell in order for it to be visible as a band on an SDS gel? Assume that you can load 100 μg of cell extract onto a gel and that you can detect 10 ng in a single band by silver staining the gel. The concentration of protein in cells is about 200 mg/mL, and a typical mammalian cell has a volume of about 1000 μm3 and a typical bacterium a volume of about 1 μm3. Given these parameters, calculate the number of copies of a 120-kd protein that would need to be present in a mammalian cell and in a bacterium in order to give a detectable band on a gel. You might try an order-of-magnitude guess before you make the calculations. 8–11 You have isolated the proteins from two adjacent spots after two-dimensional polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis and digested them with trypsin. When the masses of the peptides were measured by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, the peptides from the two proteins were found to be identical except for one (Figure Q8–2). For this peptide, the mass-to-charge (m/z) values differed by 80, a value that does not correspond to a difference in amino acid sequence. (For example, glutamic acid instead of valine at one position would give an m/z difference of around 30.) Can you suggest a possible difference between the two peptides that might account for the observed m/z difference? Masses of peptides measured by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Problem 8–11). Only the numbered peaks differ between the two protein samples. 8–12 You want to amplify the DNA between the two stretches of sequence shown in Figure Q8–3.
Any RNA with catalytic activity is referred to as a ribozyme (see figure on the next page). Formylated methionine is used to initiate prokaryotic translation. The charged initiating transfer RNA (tRNAi) is the only tRNA that goes directly to the P site, leaving the A site available for the tRNA carrying the next amino acid of the protein being made. Eukaryotic translation is inhibited by the phosphorylation of initiation factor 2 (eIF-2). The Shine-Dalgarno sequence is found in prokaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA) and facilitates the interaction of the mRNA with the small ribosomal subunit. In eukaryotes, the cap-binding proteins perform that task. Answer = B. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and western blot are used to analyze proteins. Each makes use of antibodies to detect and quantify the protein of interest. It is western blots that utilize electrophoresis. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is used to amplify DNA. Antibiotics in the tetracycline family inhibit protein synthesis by binding to and blocking the A site of the small (30S) ribosomal subunit in prokaryotes. Tetracycline specifically interacts with the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) component of the 30S subunit, inhibiting translation initiation. Eukaryotes do not contain 16S rRNA. Their small (40S) subunit contains 18S rRNA, which does not bind tetracycline.
Names common objects. May start toilet training. 2 years Walks up/down steps with help; jumps. Builds tower of six cubes. Uses two-word phrases. Follows two-step commands; removes clothes. 3 years Rides tricycle; climbs stairs with alternating feet (3–4 years). Copies a circle; uses utensils. Uses three-word sentences. Brushes teeth with help; washes/dries hands. Hops. Copies a square. Knows colors and some numbers. Cooperative play; plays board games. Skips; walks backward for long distances.
Uses three-finger (immature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (nonspecif c). Waves bye-bye; plays pat-a-cake. 12 months Cruises (11 months); walks alone. Uses two-finger (mature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (specif c). Imitates actions; separation anxiety. 15 months Walks backward. Uses cup. Uses 4–6 words. Temper tantrums. 18 months Runs; kicks a ball. Builds tower of 2–4 cubes. Names common objects. May start toilet training.
Cooperative play; plays board games. Skips; walks backward for long distances. Ties shoelaces; knows left and right; prints letters. Uses f ve-word sentences. Domestic role playing; plays dress-up. 4 years 5 years a For premature infants < 2 years of age, chronological age must be adjusted for gestational age. For example, an infant born at seven months’ gestation (two months early) would be expected to perform at the four-month level at the chronological age of six months. At each well-child check, height, weight, and head circumference are plotted on growth charts specific for gender and age:

Head circumference: Measured routinely in the first two years. ↑ head circumference can indicate hydrocephalus or tumor; ↓ head circumference can point to microcephaly (e.g., TORCH infections). Height and weight: Measured routinely until adulthood. The pattern of growth is more important than the raw numbers. Infants may lose 5–10% of birth weight (BW) over the first few days but should return to their BW by 14 days. Infants can be expected to double their BW by 4–5 months, triple by one year, and quadruple by two years. Failure to thrive: Persistent weight less than the 5th percentile for age or “falling off the growth curve” (i.e., crossing two major percentile lines on a growth chart). Classified as follows:

Organic: Due to an underlying medical condition such as cystic fibro-sis, congenital heart disease, celiac sprue, pyloric stenosis, chronic infection (e.g., HIV), and GERD.
However, it is convenient to refer to growth as the increase in size and development as an increase in function of processesrelated to body and mind. Being familiar with normal patternsof growth and development allows those practitioners whocare for children to recognize and manage abnormal variations. The genetic makeup and the physical, emotional, and socialenvironment of the individual determine how a child grows anddevelops throughout childhood. One goal of pediatrics is to helpeach child achieve his or her individual potential through periodically monitoring and screening for the normal progressionor abnormalities of growth and development. The AmericanAcademy of Pediatrics recommends routine office visits in thefirst week of life (depending on timing of nursery discharge) at 2weeks; at 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, 15, and 18 months; at 2, 2½, and3 years;then annually through adolescence/young adulthood (Fig. 9-1). Deviations in growth patterns may be nonspecific or may be important indicators of serious and chronic medical disorders. An accurate measurement of length/height, weight, and head circumference should be obtained at every health supervision visit and compared with statistical norms on growth charts. Table 5-1 summarizes several convenient benchmarks to evaluate normal growth. Serial measurements are much more useful than single measurements to detect deviations from a particular growth pattern, even if the value remains within statistically defined normal limits (percentiles). Following the trend helps define whether growth is within acceptable limits or warrants further evaluation. Growth is assessed by plotting accurate measurements on growth charts and comparing each set of measurements withprevious measurements obtained at health visits. Please seeexamples in Figures 5-1 to 5-4. Complete charts can be found at www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm for birth to 2 years and www.cdc.gov/growthcharts for 2 to 20 years. The body massindex is defined as body weight in kilograms divided by height inmeters squared; it is used to classify adiposity and is recommendedas a screening tool for children and adolescents to identify thoseoverweight or at risk for being overweight (see Chapter 29).
Diagnostic teaching, in which the child’s response to various teaching techniques is assessed, also may be helpful. Assessments of the environment in which the child is living, working, playing, and growing are important in understanding the child’s development. A home visit by a social worker, community health nurse, and/or home-based intervention specialist can provide valuable information about the child’s social milieu. Often the home visitor can suggest additional adaptive equipment or renovations if there are challenges at home. If there is a suspicion of inadequate parenting, and, especially, if there is a suspicion of neglect or abuse (including emotional abuse), the child and family must be referred to the local child protection agency. Information about reporting hotlines and local child protection agencies usually is found inside the front cover of local telephone directories (see Chapter 22). Intervention in the Primary Care Setting

The clinician must decide whether a problem requires referral for further diagnostic workup and management or whether management in the primary care setting is appropriate. Counseling roles required in caring for these children are listed in Table 10-4. When a child is young, much of the counseling interaction takes place between the parents and the clinician, and, as the child matures, direct counseling shifts increasingly toward the child. The assessment process may be therapeutic in itself. By assuming the role of a nonjudgmental, supportive listener, the clinician creates a climate of trust, allowing the family to express difficult or painful thoughts and feelings. Expressing emotions may allow the parent or caregiver to move on to the work of understanding and resolving the problem. Interview techniques may facilitate clarification of the problem for the family and for the clinician. The family’sideas about the causes of the problem and attempts at coping can provide a basis for developing strategies for problemmanagement that are much more likely to be implementedsuccessfully because they emanate, in part, from the family.The clinician shows respect by endorsing the parent’s ideaswhen appropriate; this can increase self-esteem and sense of competency. Educating parents about normal and aberrant development and behavior may prevent problems through early detection and anticipatory guidance and communicates the physician’s interest in hearing parental concerns.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored. Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Cigarette smoking accelerates coronary atherosclerosis in both sexes and at all ages and increases the risk of thrombosis, plaque instability, myocardial infarction, and death (Chap. 291e). In addition, by increasing myocardial oxygen needs and reducing oxygen supply, it aggravates angina. Smoking cessation studies have demonstrated important benefits with a significant decline in the occurrence of these adverse outcomes. The physician’s message must be clear and strong and supported by programs that achieve and monitor abstinence (Chap. 470). Hypertension (Chap. 298) is associated with an increased risk of adverse clinical events from coronary atherosclerosis as well as stroke. In addition, the left ventricular hypertrophy that results from sustained hypertension aggravates ischemia. There is evidence that long-term effective treatment of hypertension can decrease the occurrence of adverse coronary events. Diabetes mellitus (Chap. 417) accelerates coronary and peripheral atherosclerosis and is frequently associated with dyslipidemias and increases in the risk of angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden coronary death. Aggressive control of the dyslipidemia (target LDL cholesterol <70 mg/dL) and hypertension (target blood pressure 120/80 mmHg) that are frequently found in diabetic patients is highly effective and therefore essential, as described below. Abbreviation: METs, metabolic equivalent tasks. Source: Modified from WL Haskell: Rehabilitation of the coronary patient, in NK Wenger, HK Hellerstein (eds): Design and Implementation of Cardiac Conditioning Program.
Zandi PP et al: Hormone replacement therapy and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in older women. JAMA 2002;288:2123. The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her osteoporosis. Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD, & Umesh Masharani, MBBS, MRCP (UK)

A 66-year-old obese Caucasian man presented to an academic Diabetes Center for advice regarding his diabetes treatment. His diabetes was diagnosed 10 years previously on routine testing. He was initially given metformin but when his control deteriorated, the metformin was stopped and insulin treatment initiated. The patient was taking 50 units of insulin glargine and an average of 25 units of insulin aspartate pre-meals. He had never seen a diabetes educator or a dietitian. He was checking his glucose levels 4 times a day. He was smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day. On examination, his weight was 132 kg (BMI 39.5); blood pressure 145/71; and signs of mild peripheral neuropathy were present. Laboratory tests noted an HbA1c value of 8.1%, urine albumin 3007 mg/g creatinine (normal <30), serum creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (0.61–1.24), total choles-terol 128 mg/dL, triglycerides 86 mg/dL, HDL cholesterol 38 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 73 mg/dL (on atorvastatin 40 mg daily). How would you treat this patient?
The mass in the patient’s pelvis compressed this nerve, producing his sensory and motor dysfunction. During surgery, the mass was found to be a benign nerve tumor and was excised. This patient had no long-standing neurological deficit. A 65-year-old man was examined by a surgical intern because he had a history of buttock pain and impotence. On examination he had a reduced peripheral pulse on the left foot compared to the right. On direct questioning, the patient revealed that he experienced severe left-sided buttock pain after walking 100 yards. After a short period of rest, he could walk another 100 yards before the same symptoms recurred. He also noticed that over the past year he was unable to obtain an erection. He smoked heavily and was on no other drugs or treatment. The pain in the left buttock is ischemic in nature. He gives a typical history relating to lack of blood flow to the muscles. A similar finding is present when muscular branches of the femoral artery are occluded or stenosed. Such patients develop similar (ischemic) pain in the calf muscles called intermittent claudication. How does the blood get to the gluteal muscles? Blood arrives at the aortic bifurcation and then passes into the common iliac arteries, which divide into the internal and external iliac vessels.
Both thumbs are placed on the tibial tuberosity anteriorly, and the fingers are placed into the popliteal fossa between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. The popliteal artery is palpated by compressing it against the posterior aspect of the tibia just below the knee. The posterior tibial pulse is detected by palpation 2 cm posterior to the medial malleolus. The dorsa-lis pedis is detected 1 cm lateral to the hallucis longus extensor tendon, which dorsiflexes the great toe and is clearly visible on the dorsum of the foot. Pulses can be graded using either the traditional four-point scale or the basic two-point scale system (Table 23-2). The foot should also be carefully examined for pallor on elevation and rubor on dependency, as these findings are indicative of chronic ischemia. Note should also be made of nail changes and loss of hair. Ulceration and other findings specific to disease states are described in relevant sections later in this chapter.After reconstructive vascular surgery, the graft may be available for examination, depending on its type and course. The in situ lower extremity graft runs in the subcutaneous fat and can be palpated along most of its length. A change in pulse quality, aneurysmal enlargement, or a new bruit should be care-fully noted. Axillofemoral grafts, femoral-to-femoral grafts, and arteriovenous access grafts can usually be easily palpated as well.Noninvasive Diagnostic Evaluation  of the Vascular PatientAnkle-Brachial Index. There is increasing interest in the use of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) to evaluate patients at risk for cardiovascular events. An ABI less than 0.9 correlates with increased risk of myocardial infarction and indicates significant, although perhaps asymptomatic, underlying peripheral vascular disease. The ABI is determined in the following ways. Blood pressure is measured in both upper extremities using the high-est systolic blood pressure as the denominator for the ABI.
Large aneurysms may be missed in the obese, while normal aortic pulsations may be mistaken for an aneurysm in thin individuals. Rarely patients present with back pain and/or abdominal pain with a tender pulsatile mass. Patients with these symptoms must be treated as a rupture until proven otherwise. If the patient is hemodynamically stable and the aneurysm is intact on a CT scan, the patient is admitted for blood pressure control with intravenous antihypertensive agents and undergoes repair usually within 12 to 24 hours or at least during the same hospitalization. In contrast, patients who are hemodynamically unstable with a history of acute back pain and/or syncope and a known unrepaired AAA or a pulsatile abdominal mass should be immediately taken to the operating room with a presumed diagnosis of a ruptured AAA.Overall mortality of AAA rupture is 71% to 77%, which includes all out-of-hospital and in-hospital deaths, as compared with 2% to 6% for elective open surgical repair.49 Nearly half of all patients with ruptured AAA will die before reaching the hospital. For the remainder, surgical mortality is 45% to 50% and has not substantially changed in the last 30 years.50Relevant AnatomyAn AAA is defined as a pathologic focal dilation of the aorta that is greater than 30 mm or 1.5 times the adjacent diameter of the normal aorta (Fig. 23-28). Male aortas tend to be larger than female aortas, and there is generalized growth of the aortic diameter with each decade of life. Ninety percent of AAAs are infrarenal in location and have a fusiform morphology. There is a higher predilection for juxtarenal and suprarenal AAAs in women compared with men. Concomitant common iliac and/or hypogastric artery aneurysms can be found in 20% to 25% of patients. Although the etiology of most aortic aneurysms is ath-erosclerotic, clinically significant peripheral occlusive disease is unusual and present in less than 10% of all cases.Although extravascular anatomy is important for open surgical repair of AAA, intravascular anatomy and aortoiliac morphology are important for endovascular repair. Pertinent anatomic dimensions include the diameter of the proximal non-dilated infrarenal aortic neck, which can range from 18 to 30 mm; common iliac artery, which can range from 8 to 16 mm; and external iliac arteries, which can range from 6 to 10 mm. Mor-phologically, the aortic neck can manifest complex angulation above and below the renal arteries due to combination of elon-gation and anterolateral displacement by the posterior bulge of the aneurysmal aorta. Furthermore, the shape of the proxi-mal neck is rarely tubular, but often is conical, reverse coni-cal, or barrel-shaped.
The mortality rate has been reported to be as high as 67%.77 Risk factors for Fournier’s gangrene include perirectal abscesses, diabetes, obesity, and chronic alcoholism.78 The often polymicrobial infection spreads along dartos, Scarpa’s, and Colles’ fascia. Clinical signs include perineal and scrotal pain, inflammation, necrosis, and crepitus.78 The diagnosis is largely made on clinical suspicion; however, radiographic findings on CT imaging often assist with the diag-nosis, including soft tissue air associated with fluid collections within the deep fascia.79Prompt and aggressive surgical debridement of nonvia-ble tissue and broad spectrum antibiotics are necessary to prevent further spread (Fig. 40-7A). Fecal diversion with endorectal tubes serve as an option for conservative fecal diversion.80 If there is damage to the external anal sphincter, 67patients may require a colostomy. Patients frequently require return trips to the operating room for further debridement. Negative pressure wound therapy systems have been shown to reduce hospitalization time by aiding in wound healing.81 Reconstructive strategies involving skin grafting are needed when large tissue defects result from extensive tissue damage.PriapismPriapism is a persistent erection for greater than 4 hours unre-lated to sexual stimulation.82 Priapism is divided into two types, based on the underlying pathophysiology. The most common type—low-flow/ischemic priapism—is a medical emergency. On examination, the penis is very tender, and both cavernosal bodies will be rigid while the glans will be flaccid. Decreased venous outflow with persistent inflow results in increased intracorporal pressure and tumescence, which is the normal process of erection. Diminished arterial inflow due to elevated Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176901/03/19   6:35 PM 1770SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintrapenile pressure usually is brief under normal circumstances. Priapism is essentially a compartment syndrome. With pro-longed erection (priapism), the sustained decrease in arterial inflow ultimately causes tissue hypoxia, acidosis, and edema and results in long-term fibrosis and impotence, and sometimes frank necrosis. Risk factors include sickle cell disease or trait, malignancy, medications, cocaine abuse, certain antidepres-sants, and total parenteral nutrition.82-84 If a cause is not identi-fied, a hematologic workup is necessary to rule out malignancy or blood dyscrasias.The management of priapism is rapid detumescence with the goal of preservation of future erectile function. The ability to achieve normal erections is directly related to the length of the episode of priapism. Ischemic priapism can be confirmed with a penile blood gas from the cavernosal bodies demonstrating hypoxic, acidotic blood.
The patient or family will describe an acute onset of pain in the groin/hip, anterior thigh, or knee. Irritation of the obturator nerve can cause referred pain in the thigh and knee when the pathology is at the hip. Patients with transient synovitis are often afebrile, walk with a painful limp, and have normal to minimally elevated white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate compared with bacterial diseases of the hip (Table 199-1). Table 197-3 lists the differential diagnosis of a limping child. Anteroposterior and frog-leg radiographs of the hip are usually normal. Ultrasonography may reveal a joint effusion. It is mandatory to rule out septic arthritis in the presence of effusion with a joint aspiration and cell count. The mainstay of treatment is bed rest and minimal weight bearing until the pain resolves. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication is usually sufficient to decrease pain. Limiting strenuous activity and exercise for 1 to 2 weeks following recovery is helpful. Follow-up will help ensure that there is no deterioration. Lack of improvement necessitates further evaluation for more serious disorders. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Elevated joint fluid cell count Afebrile Fever—temperature >38.5° C Leukocytosis Normal WBC count ESR >20 mm/hour Normal ESR and CRP

Refusal to walk Painful limp Hip held in external rotation, Hip held normally abduction, and flexion

CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; WBC, white blood cell. *Examples: Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis of hip. Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCPD) is idiopathic avascular necrosis (osteonecrosis) of the capital epiphysis of the femoral head.
A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis? Treatment? A man unexpectedly ﬂies across the country, takes a new name, and has no memory of his prior life. Panic disorder. Agranulocytosis. Schizophreniform disorder (diagnosis of schizophrenia requires ≥ 6 months of symptoms). Weight gain, type 2 DM, QT prolongation. Acute dystonia (oculogyric crisis). Treat with benztropine or diphenhydramine. Neuroleptics. Conduct disorder. Rett’s disorder. Acute mania. Start a mood stabilizer (e.g., lithium).
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;29:947. Zesiewicz TA et al: Update on treatment of essential tremor. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2013;15:410. The history is suggestive of parkinsonism, but the incon-spicuous tremor and early cognitive changes raise the possi-bility of atypical parkinsonism rather than classic Parkinson’s disease. The prognosis of these disorders is worse than that of classic Parkinson’s disease. Given the cognitive changes and his age, the use of a dopamine agonist was unwise, as these agents are more likely than levodopa to exacerbate or precipitate behavioral and cognitive disturbances. Sleep attacks may occur spontaneously but are especially noted in patients receiving dopamine agonists. The patient has also developed punding, which is a recognized adverse effect of dopaminergic medication. Surgical treatment (deep brain stimulation) is contraindicated in patients with cognitive changes or atypical parkinsonism. Charles DeBattista, MD * severe akathisia. Although more costly, lurasidone is then prescribed, which, over the course of several weeks of treatment, improves his symptoms and is tolerated by the patient. What signs and symptoms would support an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia? In the treatment of schizophre-nia, what benefits do the second-generation antipsychotic drugs offer over the traditional agents such as haloperidol? In addition to the management of schizophrenia, what other clinical indications warrant consideration of the use of drugs nominally classified as antipsychotics? A 19-year-old male student is brought into the clinic by his mother who has been concerned about her son’s erratic behavior and strange beliefs.
Treatment? Medication to avoid in patients with a history of alcohol withdrawal seizures. A 13-year-old boy has a history of theft, vandalism, and violence toward family pets. A five-month-old girl has ↓ head growth, truncal dyscoordination, and ↓ social interaction. A patient hasn’t slept for days, lost $20,000 gambling, is agitated, and has pressured speech. Diagnosis? Treatment? After a minor fender bender, a man wears a neck brace and requests permanent disability. A nurse presents with severe hypoglycemia; blood analysis reveals no elevation in C-peptide. A patient continues to use cocaine after being in jail, losing his job, and not paying child support. A violent patient has vertical and horizontal nystagmus. A woman who was abused as a child frequently feels outside of or detached from her body. A man has repeated, intense urges to rub his body against unsuspecting passengers on a bus. A schizophrenic patient takes haloperidol for one year and develops uncontrollable tongue movements. Diagnosis?
Patients should be given the usual “ABCD” treatment for poisonings (see Chapter 58) and treated supportively. Management of overdoses of thioridazine and mesoridazine, which are complicated by cardiac arrhythmias, is similar to that for tricyclic antidepressants (see Chapter 30). Patients with schizophrenia need psychosocial support based around activities of daily living, including housing, social activities, returning to school, obtaining the optimal level of work they may be capable of, and restoring social interactions. Unfortunately, funding for this crucial component of treatment has been minimized in recent years. Case management and therapy services are a vital part of the treatment program that should be provided to patients with schizophrenia. First-episode patients are particularly needful of this support because they often deny their illness and are noncompliant with medication. Benefits & Limitations of Drug Treatment

As noted at the beginning of this chapter, antipsychotic drugs have had a major impact on psychiatric treatment. First, they have shifted the vast majority of patients from long-term hospitalization to the community. For many patients, this shift has provided a better life under more humane circumstances and in many cases has made possible life without frequent use of physical restraints. For others, the tragedy of an aimless existence is now being played out in the streets of our communities rather than in mental institutions. Second, these antipsychotic drugs have markedly shifted psychiatric thinking to a more biologic orientation. Partly because of research stimulated by the effects of these drugs on schizophrenia, we now know much more about central nervous system physiology and pharmacology than was known before the introduction of these agents. However, despite much research, schizophrenia remains a scientific mystery and a personal disaster for the patient. Although most schizophrenic patients obtain some degree of benefit from these drugs—in some cases substantial benefit—none are made well by them. ■ LITHIUM, MOOD-STABILIZING DRUGS, & OTHER TREATMENT FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER

Bipolar disorder, once known as manic-depressive illness, was conceived of as a psychotic disorder distinct from schizophrenia at the end of the 19th century.
Generally, over— doses with legal or illegal substances are considered nonviolent in method, whereas jump- ing, gunshot wounds, and other methods are considered violent. Another dimension for classification is medical consequences of the behavior, with high—lethality attempts being defined as those requiring medical hospitalization beyond a visit to an emergency depart- ment. An additional dimension considered includes the degree of planning versus impul— siveness of the attempt, a characteristic that might have consequences for the medical outcome of a suicide attempt. If the suicidal behavior occurred 12—24 months prior to evaluation, the condition is considered to be in early remission. Individuals remain at higher risk for further suicide at- tempts and death in the 24 months after a suicide attempt, and the period 12—24 months af— ter the behavior took place is specified as "early remission." The essential manifestation of suicidal behavior disorder is a suicide attempt. A suicide at— tempt is a behavior that the individual has undertaken with at least some intent to die. The behavior might or might not lead to injury or serious medical consequences. Several fac- tors can inﬂuence the medical consequences of the suicide attempt, including poor plan- ning, lack of knowledge about the lethality of the method chosen, low intentionality or ambivalence, or chance intervention by others after the behavior has been initiated. These should not be considered in assigning the diagnosis. Determining the degree of intent can be challenging. Individuals might not acknowl— edge intent, especially in situations where doing so could result in hospitalization or cause distress to loved ones. Markers of risk include degree of planning, including selection of a time and place to minimize rescue or interruption; the individual’s mental state at the time of the behavior, with acute agitation being especially concerning; recent discharge from inpatient care; or recent discontinuation of a mood stabilizer such as lithium or an anti- psychotic such as clozapine in the case of schizophrenia. Examples of environmental “trig- gers” include recently learning of a potentially fatal medical diagnosis such as cancer, experiencing the sudden and unexpected loss of a close relative or partner, loss of employ— ment, or displacement from housing. Conversely, features such as talking to others about future events or preparedness to sign a contract for safety are less reliable indicators.
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified. A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up. The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis. The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made (squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging procedure. Staging of any malignancy is important because it determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third esophageal tumor. The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to the liver. Bleeding was the cause of the anemia. Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably friable, and with the passage of digested material across the tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs.
The neck should be examined for thyromegaly. A careful inspection of the mouth and pharynx should disclose lesions that may interfere with passage of food. Missing dentition can interfere with mastication and exacerbate an existing cause of dysphagia. Physical examination is less helpful in the evaluation of esophageal dysphagia as most relevant pathology is restricted to the esophagus. The notable exception is skin disease. Changes in the skin may suggest a diagnosis of scleroderma or mucocutaneous diseases such as pemphigoid, lichen planus and epidermolysis bullosa, all of which can involve the esophagus. Although most instances of dysphagia are attributable to benign disease processes, dysphagia is also a cardinal symptom of several malignancies, making it an important symptom to evaluate. Cancer may result in dysphagia due to intraluminal obstruction (esophageal or proximal gastric cancer, metastatic deposits), extrinsic compression (lymphoma, lung cancer), or paraneoplastic syndromes. Even when not attributable to malignancy, dysphagia is usually a manifestation of an identifiable and treatable disease entity, making its evaluation beneficial to the patient and gratifying to the practitioner. The specific diagnostic algorithm to pursue is guided by the details of the history (Fig. 53-2). If oral or pharyngeal dysphagia is suspected, a fluoroscopic swallow study, usually done by a swallow therapist, is the procedure of choice. Otolaryngoscopic and neurologic evaluation also can be important, depending on the circumstances. For suspected esophageal dysphagia, upper endoscopy is the single most useful test. Endoscopy allows better visualization of mucosal lesions than does barium radiography and also allows one to obtain mucosal biopsies.
Episodic dysphagia to solids that is unchanged over years indicates a benign disease process such as a Schatzki’s ring or eosinophilic esophagitis. Food impaction with a prolonged inability to pass an ingested bolus even with ingestion of liquid is typical of a structural dysphagia. Chest pain frequently accompanies dysphagia whether it is related to motor disorders, structural disorders, or reflux disease. A prolonged history of heartburn preceding the onset of dysphagia is suggestive of peptic stricture and, infrequently, esophageal adenocarcinoma. A history of prolonged nasogastric intubation, esophageal or head and neck surgery, ingestion of caustic to neck, nasal regurgitation, aspiration, neck, food impaction

FIguRE 53-2 Approach to the patient with dysphagia. Etiologies in bold print are the most common. ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease. agents or pills, previous radiation or chemotherapy, or associated mucocutaneous diseases may help isolate the cause of dysphagia. With accompanying odynophagia, which usually is indicative of ulceration, infectious or pill-induced esophagitis should be suspected. In patients with AIDS or other immunocompromised states, esophagitis due to opportunistic infections such as Candida, herpes simplex virus, or cytomegalovirus and to tumors such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and lymphoma should be considered. A strong history of atopy increases concerns for eosinophilic esophagitis. Physical examination is important in the evaluation of oral and pharyngeal dysphagia because dysphagia is usually only one of many manifestations of a more global disease process. Signs of bulbar or pseudobulbar palsy, including dysarthria, dysphonia, ptosis, tongue atrophy, and hyperactive jaw jerk, in addition to evidence of generalized neuromuscular disease, should be elicited. The neck should be examined for thyromegaly. A careful inspection of the mouth and pharynx should disclose lesions that may interfere with passage of food.
Patients with these conditions may deteriorate rapidly despite initially appearing well. The remaining population with non-cardiopulmonary conditions has a more favorable prognosis during completion of the diagnostic work-up. A rapid targeted assessment for a serious cardiopulmonary cause is of particular relevance for patients with acute ongoing pain who have presented for emergency evaluation. Among patients presenting in the outpatient setting with chronic pain or pain that has resolved, a general diagnostic assessment is reasonably undertaken (see “Outpatient Evaluation of Chest Discomfort,” below). A series of questions that can be used to structure the clinical evaluation of patients with chest discomfort is shown in Table 19-2. 1. Could the chest discomfort be due to an acute, potentially life-threatening condition that warrants urgent evaluation and management? 2. If not, could the discomfort be due to a chronic condition likely to lead to serious complications? 3. If not, could the discomfort be due to an acute condition that warrants specific treatment? 4. If not, could the discomfort be due to another treatable chronic condition? Esophageal reflux Cervical disk disease Esophageal spasm Arthritis of the shoulder or spine Peptic ulcer disease Costochondritis Gallbladder disease Other musculoskeletal disorders Other gastrointestinal conditions Anxiety state

Source: Developed by Dr. Thomas H. Lee for the 18th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. The evaluation of nontraumatic chest discomfort relies heavily on the clinical history and physical examination to direct subsequent diagnostic testing.
Recurrent acid regurgitation may cause poor denti tion. Dyspeptics may exhibit epigastric tenderness or distention. Discriminating functional and organic causes of indigestion man dates excluding certain historic and exam features. Odynophagia suggests esophageal infection. Dysphagia is concerning for a benign or malignant esophageal blockage. Other alarm features include unexplained weight loss, recurrent vomiting, occult or gross bleed ing, jaundice, palpable mass or adenopathy, and a family history of gastrointestinal neoplasm. Because indigestion is prevalent and most cases result from GERD or functional dyspepsia, a general principle is to perform only lim ited and directed diagnostic testing of selected individuals. Once alarm factors are excluded (Table 54-3), patients with typi cal GERD do not need further evaluation and are treated empiri cally. Upper endoscopy is indicated to exclude mucosal injury in cases with atypical symptoms, symptoms unresponsive to acid sup pression, or alarm factors. For heartburn >5 years in duration, espe cially in patients >50 years old, endoscopy is advocated to screen for Barrett’s metaplasia. The benefits and cost-effectiveness of this approach have not been validated in controlled studies. Ambulatory endoscopically attached to the esophageal wall is considered for chest pain. High-resolution esophageal manometry is ordered when surgical treatment of GERD is considered. A low LES pressure predicts failure of drug therapy and provides a rationale to proceed to surgery. Poor esophageal body peristalsis raises concern about postoperative dysphagia and directs the choice of surgical tech nique.
16-22 Effective vaccines must induce long-lasting protection while being safe and inexpensive. A successful vaccine must possess several features in addition to its ability to provoke a protective immune response (Fig. 16.23). First, it must be safe. Vaccines must be given to huge numbers of people, relatively few of whom are likely to die of, or sometimes even catch, the disease that the vaccine is designed to prevent. This means that even a low level of toxicity is unacceptable. Second, the vaccine must be able to produce protective immunity in a very high proportion of the people to whom it is given. Third, particularly in poorer countries where it is impracticable to give regular ‘booster’ vaccinations to dispersed rural populations, a successful vaccine must generate long-lived immunological memory. This means that the vaccine must prime both B and T lymphocytes. Fourth, vaccines must be very cheap if they are to be administered to large populations. Vaccines are one of the most cost-effective measures in health care, but this benefit is eroded as the cost per dose rises. Another benefit of an effective vaccination program is the ‘herd immunity’ that it confers on the general population. By lowering the number of susceptible members of a population, vaccination decreases the natural reservoir of infected individuals in that population and so reduces the probability of transmission of infection. Thus, even unvaccinated members will be protected because their individual chance of encountering the pathogen is decreased. However, the herd immunity effect is seen only at relatively high levels of vaccination within a population; for mumps, the necessary level is estimated to be around 80%, and below this level sporadic epidemics can occur.
The mechanisms of innate immunity that operate in the first two phases of the immune response are described in Chapters 2 and 3, and thymus-independent (T-independent) B-cell responses are covered in Chapter 10. The early phases contribute to the initiation of adaptive immunity, and they influence the functional character of the antigen-specific effector T cells and antibodies that appear on the scene in the late phase of the response. There are striking similarities in the effector mechanisms at each phase of the response; the main change is in the recognition structure used. An effective adaptive immune response leads to a state of protective immunity. This state consists of the presence of effector cells and molecules produced in the initial response, and of immunological memory. Immunological memory is manifested as a heightened ability to respond to pathogens that have previously been encountered and successfully eliminated. Memory T and B lymphocytes have the property of being able to transfer immune memory to naive recipients. The mechanisms that maintain immunological memory include certain cytokines, such as IL-7 and IL-15, as well as homeostatic interactions between the T-cell receptors on memory cells with self peptide:self MHC complexes. The artificial induction of protective immunity, which includes immunological memory, by vaccination is the most outstanding accomplishment of immunology in the field of medicine. The understanding of how this is accomplished is now catching up with its practical success. However, as we will see in Chapter 13, many pathogens do not induce protective immunity that completely eliminates the pathogen, so we will need to learn what prevents this before we can prepare effective vaccines against these pathogens. Questions. 11.1 True or False: The immune response is a dynamic process that initiates with an antigen-independent response, which becomes more focused and powerful as it develops antigen specificity. Once the adaptive immune system develops, a single type of response is capable of eliminating any type of pathogen. 11.2 Multiple Choice: Which statement is incorrect?
While vaccination is still the greatest tool of immunology to fight diseases, modern approaches have added new tools, such as monoclonal antibodies, that have become progressively more important in the clinic over the past two decades. Summary to Chapter 1. The immune system defends the host against infection. Innate immunity serves as a first line of defense but lacks the ability to recognize certain pathogens and

Questions. to provide the specific protective immunity that prevents reinfection. Adaptive immunity is based on clonal selection from a repertoire of lymphocytes bearing highly diverse antigen-specific receptors that enable the immune system to recognize any foreign antigen. In the adaptive immune response, antigen-specific lymphocytes proliferate and differentiate into clones of effector lymphocytes that eliminate the pathogen. Figure1.7 summarizes the phases of the immune response and their approximate timings. Host defense requires different recognition systems and a wide variety of effector mechanisms to seek out and destroy the wide variety of pathogens in their various habitats within the body and at its external and internal surfaces. Not only can the adaptive immune response eliminate a pathogen, but, in the process, it also generates increased numbers of differentiated memory lymphocytes through clonal selection, and this allows a more rapid and effective response upon reinfection. The regulation of immune responses, whether to suppress them when unwanted or to stimulate them in the prevention of infectious disease, is the major medical goal of research in immunology. Questions. 1.1 Multiple Choice: Which of the following examples can be considered an illustration of vaccination? A. Inoculating an individual with cowpox in order to protect that individual against smallpox

B. Administering the serum of animals immune to diphtheria to protect against the effect of diphtheria toxin in an exposed individual

C. A bacterial infection that results in complement activation and destruction of the pathogen

D. An individual that becomes ill with chickenpox, but does not develop it again due to the development of immunologic memory 1.2 Multiple Choice: Which of the following is an appropriate definition for immunological memory?
Nurs. 2004, 19:357–363. Rabinovich, N.R., McInnes, P., Klein, D.L., and Hall, B.F.: Vaccine technologies: view to the future. Science 1994, 265:1401–1404. 16-21 Most effective vaccines generate antibodies that prevent the damage caused by toxins or that neutralize the pathogen and stop infection. Levine, M.M., and Levine, O.S. : Influence of disease burden, public perception, and other factors on new vaccine development, implementation, and continued use. Lancet 1997, 350:1386–1392. Mouque, H., Scheid, J.F., Zoller, M.J., Krogsgaard, M., Ott, R.G., Shukair, S., Artyomov, M.N., Pietzsch, J., Connors, M., Pereyra, F., et al. : Polyreactivity increases the apparent affinity of anti-HIV antibodies by heteroligation. Nature 2010, 467:591–595. Nichol, K.L., Lind, A., Margolis, K.L., Murdoch, M., McFadden, R., Hauge, M., Palese, P., and Garcia-Sastre, A.: Influenza vaccines: present and future. J. Clin. Invest. 2002, 110:9–13.
743

A-36 Knockdown of gene expression by

References. 744

RNA interference (RNAi). 790

Appendix I The Immunologist's Toolbox 749

A-1. Immunization. 749

A-2 Antibody responses. 752

A-3 Affinity chromatography. 753

A-4 Radioimmunoassay (RIA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and competitive inhibition assay. 753

A-5 Hemagglutination and blood typing. 755

A-6 Coombs tests and the detection of rhesus incompatibility. 756

A-7 Monoclonal antibodies. 757

A-8 Phage display libraries for antibody V-region  production. 758

A-9 Generation of human monoclonal antibodies from vaccinated individuals. 759

A-10 Microscopy and imaging using fluorescent dyes. 760

A-11 Immunoelectron microscopy. 761

A-12 Immunohistochemistry.
The injured hand should be splinted with MPs at 90° and IPs at 0°, as described earlier.Vascular InjuriesVascular injuries have the potential to be limb or digit threaten-ing. A partial laceration of an artery at the wrist level can poten-tially cause exsanguinating hemorrhage. Consultations for these injuries must be evaluated urgently.Initial treatment for an actively bleeding wound should be direct local pressure for no less than 10 continuous minutes. If this is unsuccessful, an upper extremity tourniquet inflated to 100 mmHg above the systolic pressure should be used. One should keep this tourniquet time to less than 2 hours to avoid tissue necrosis. Once bleeding is controlled well enough to evaluate the wound, it may be cautiously explored to evaluate for bleeding points. One must be very cautious if attempting to ligate these to ensure that adjacent structures such as nerves are not included in the ligature.The hand must be evaluated for adequacy of perfusion to the hand as a whole as well as the individual digits. Capillary refill, turgor, Doppler signal, and bleeding to pinprick all pro-vide useful information regarding vascular status. The finger or hand with vascular compromise requires urgent operative explo-ration. Unlike the complete amputation, in which the amputated part can be cold preserved (see later section, “Amputation and Replantation”), devascularization without amputation produces warm ischemia, which is tolerated only for a matter of hours.For the noncritical vascular injury, two treatment options exist. Simple ligation will control hemorrhage. At least one of the palmar arterial arches is intact in 97% of patients, so this will usually not compromise hand perfusion.5 Each digit also has two arterial inflows and can survive on one (see “Amputations and Replantation” section). In the academic hospital setting, however, consideration should be given to repairing all vascular injuries. Instructing a resident in vascular repair in the noncriti-cal setting will produce a more skilled and prepared resident for when a critical vascular injury does arise.ANESTHESIALocal AnesthesiaAnesthetic blockade can be administered at the wrist level, digi-tal level, or with local infiltration as needed. Keep in mind that all local anesthetics are less effective in areas of inflammation.The agents most commonly used are lidocaine and bupiva-caine.
Patients retain full sensibility in the advanced skin and can be mobilized within days of surgery (Fig. 44-16A–C).For wounds too large to cover with homodigital tissue, regional flaps can be considered. The skin from the distal radial thenar eminence can be raised as a random pattern flap  (Fig. 44-16D–F). The finger is maintained in flexion for 14 to 21 days until division of the flap pedicle and inset of the flap. Some authors have reported prolonged stiffness in patients over 30 years old, but careful flap design helps minimize this  complication.32 Alternatively, the skin from the dorsum of the middle phalanx of an adjacent digit can be raised as a flap to cover the volar P3 (Fig. 44-16G–I). The flap is inset at 14 to  21 days. Long-term studies have shown this flap develops sen-sation over time.33Patients with fingertip injures must be assessed for the possibility of salvage of the injured digit(s) taken within the context of the patient’s recovery needs and goals. The surgeon then matches the available options to the particular patient needs.High-Pressure Injection InjuriesHigh-pressure devices are commonly used for cleaning and applications of liquids such as lubricants and paint. Most commonly, the inexperienced worker accidentally discharges the device into his nondominant hand at the base of the digit. Severity of injury depends on the amount and type of liquid injected; hydrophobic compounds cause greater damage.34These injuries are typically quite innocuous to inspection. They are, however, digit-threatening emergencies. The patient should be informed of the severity of the injury, and explora-tion is ideally performed within 6 hours of injury. Up to 50% of such injuries result in loss of the digit, but early recogni-tion and treatment are associated with increased chance of digit  survival.35 Early frank discussion with the patient and initiation of appropriate treatment produce the best results and medicole-gal protection.Compartment SyndromeCompartment syndromes can occur in the forearm and/or the hand.
The nerve conduction studies indicated that the compression site was at the elbow joint. The clinical findings are not consistent with carpal tunnel syndrome. The clinician should have been alerted to this problem given that the patient experienced numbness over the thenar eminence of the hand. This clue indicates an understanding of the anatomy. Compression of the nerve within the carpal tunnel does not produce this numbness, because the small cutaneous branch that supplies this region is proximal to the flexor retinaculum. The nerve compromise was caused by the ligament of Struthers, which is an embryological remnant of the coracobrachialis muscle. It is an extremely rare finding. Occasionally it may ossify and cross the nerve, artery, and vein to produce compression in arm extension. Although this is very rare and unusual, it illustrates the complex course of the median nerve. After a hard day’s studying, two medical students decided to meet for coffee. The more senior student said to the freshman that he would bet him $50 that he could not lift a matchbook with a finger. The freshman placed $50 on the table and the bet was on. The senior medical student told the freshman to make a fist and place it in a palm-downward position, so that the middle phalanges of the fingers were in direct contact with the bar counter. He was then told to extend his middle finger so that it stuck forward while maintaining the middle phalanges of the index finger, the ring finger, and the little finger on the bar surface. A matchbook was placed on top of the freshman’s middle fingernail and he was told to flip it.
The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve provides sensation to the ulnar one and a half digits and dorsal hand in complement to the SRN.HAND EXAMINATIONEmergency Department/Inpatient ConsultationA common scenario in which the hand surgeon will be intro-duced to the patient is in trauma or other acute situations. The patient is evaluated by inspection, palpation, and provocative testing.On inspection, one should first note the position of the hand. The resting hand has a normal cascade of the fingers, with the small finger flexed most and the index finger least  (Fig. 44-6). Disturbance of this suggests a tendon or skeletal problem. Also note any gross deformities or wounds and what deeper structures, if any, are visible in such wounds. Observe for abnormal coloration of a portion or all of the hand (this can be confounded by ambient temperature or other injuries), edema, and/or clubbing of the fingertips.Palpation typically begins with the radial and ulnar artery pulses at the wrist level. Pencil Doppler examination can sup-plement this and evaluate distal vessels. A pulsatile signal is normally detectable by pencil Doppler in the pad of the finger at the center of the whorl of creases. Discrepancies between digits should be noted. If all other tests are inconclusive, pricking the involved digit with a 25-gauge needle should produce bright red capillary bleeding. If an attached digit demonstrates inadequate or absent blood flow (warm ischemia), the urgency of complet-ing the evaluation and initiating treatment markedly increases.Sensation must be evaluated prior to any administration of local anesthetic. At a minimum, light and sharp touch sensation should be documented for the radial and ulnar aspects of the tip of each digit. Beware of writing “sensation intact” at the con-clusion of this evaluation. Rather, one should document what was tested (e.g., “light and sharp touch sensation present and symmetric to the tips of all digits of the injured hand”).
Formic acid has been known to cause hemolysis and hemoglobinuria, and hydroflu-oric acid causes hypocalcemia. Hydrofluoric acid is a particu-larly common offender due to its widespread industrial uses. Calcium-based therapies are the mainstay of treating hydroflu-oric acid burns, with topical application of calcium gluconate onto wounds18 and IV administration of calcium gluconate for systemic hypocalcemia symptoms. Intra-arterial calcium gluco-nate infusion provides effective treatment of progressive tissue injury and intense pain.19,20 Patients undergoing intra-arterial therapy need continuous cardiac monitoring. Persistent refrac-tory hypocalcemia with electrocardiac abnormalities may signal the need for emergent excision of the burned areas.21BURN DEPTHBased on the original burn depth classification by Dupuytren in 1832,22 burn wounds are commonly classified as superficial (first-degree), partial-thickness (second-degree), full-thickness (third-degree), and fourth-degree burns, which affect underlying soft tissue. Fifth-degree burns (through muscle to bone) and sixth degree burns (charring bone) were also described although are less common. Partial-thickness burns are classified as either superficial or deep partial-thickness burns by depth of involved dermis. Clinically, first-degree burns are painful but do not blis-ter, second-degree burns have dermal involvement and are extremely painful with weeping and blisters, and third-degree burns are leathery, painless, and nonblanching. Jackson described three zones of tissue injury following burn injury.23 The zone of coagulation is the most severely burned portion and is typically in the center of the wound. As the name implies, the affected tissue is coagulated and sometimes frankly necrotic, much like a full thickness burn, and will need excision and graft-ing. Peripheral to that is a zone of stasis, with variable degrees of vasoconstriction and resultant ischemia, much like a second-degree burn. Appropriate resuscitation and wound care may pre-vent conversion to a deeper wound, but infection or suboptimal perfusion may result in an increase in burn depth. This is clini-cally relevant because many superficial partial-thickness burns will heal with nonoperative  management, and the majority of deep partial-thickness burns benefit from excision and skin grafting. The outermost area of a burn is called the zone of hyperemia, which will heal with minimal or no scarring and is most like a superficial partial thickness burn or first-degree burn.Unfortunately, even experienced burn surgeons have lim-ited ability to accurately predict the healing potential of partial-thickness burns soon after injury; one reason is that burn wounds evolve over the 48 to 72 hours after injury. Numerous burn depth assessment tools have been developed with the idea that 39%4.5%4.5%9%9%18%1%1%18%18%18%FrontBackFigure 8-1.
Although the incubation period of gonorrhea is less well defined in women than in men, symptoms usually develop within 10 days of infection and are more acute and intense than those of chlamydial cervicitis. The physical examination may reveal a mucopurulent discharge (mucopus) issuing from the cervical os. Because Gram’s stain is not sensitive for the diagnosis of gonorrhea in women, specimens should be submitted for culture or a nonculture assay (see “Laboratory Diagnosis,” below). Edematous and friable cervical ectopy and endocervical bleeding induced by gentle swabbing are more often seen in chlamydial infection. Gonococcal infection may extend deep enough to produce dyspareunia and lower abdominal or back pain. In such cases, it is imperative to consider a diagnosis of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and to administer treatment for that disease (Chaps. 163 and 213). N. gonorrhoeae may also be recovered from the urethra and rectum of women with cervicitis, but these are rarely the only infected sites. Urethritis in women may produce symptoms of internal dysuria, which is often attributed to “cystitis.” Pyuria in the absence of bacteriuria seen on Gram’s stain of unspun urine, accompanied by urine cultures that fail to yield >102 colonies of bacteria usually associated with urinary tract infection, signifies the possibility of urethritis due to C. trachomatis. Urethral infection with N. gonorrhoeae may also occur in this context, but in this instance urethral cultures are usually positive. gonococcal vaginitis The vaginal mucosa of healthy women is lined by stratified squamous epithelium and is rarely infected by N. gonorrhoeae. However, gonococcal vaginitis can occur in anestrogenic women (e.g., prepubertal girls and postmenopausal women), in whom the vaginal stratified squamous epithelium is often thinned down to the basilar layer, which can be infected by N. gonorrhoeae. The intense inflammation of the vagina makes the physical (speculum and bimanual) examination extremely painful. The vaginal mucosa is red and edematous, and an abundant purulent discharge is often present. Infection in the urethra and in Skene’s and Bartholin’s glands often accompanies gonococcal vaginitis.
Complications are rare. The prognosis is excellent. Available @ StudentConsult.com

Adolescents have the highest rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Compared with adults, sexually active adolescents are more likely to believe they will not contract an STI, more likely to come into contact with an infected sexual partner, less likely to receive health care when an STI develops, and less likely to be compliant with treatment for an STI. Although numerous organisms cause STIs, the diseases can be grouped by the characteristic clinical presentation. Urethritis and endocervicitis (Table 116-1) are characteristic of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and are the most common STIs. Note that more than 70% of genital chlamydial infections in women are asymptomatic. Genital ulcers (Table 116-2) are characteristic of syphilis (Treponema pallidum), genital herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections, chancroid (Haemophilus ducreyi), and granuloma inguinale, also known as donovanosis (Klebsiella granulomatis). Vaginal discharge (Table 116-3) is a symptom of trichomoniasis (Trichomonas vaginalis) and is part of the spectrum of vulvovaginitis (see Chapter 115), which is not always associated with sexual activity. Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes condylomata acuminata, or genital warts (Table 116-4), and is the major risk factor for cervical, vulvar, and vaginal cancers. STIs are associated with significant physiologic and psychological morbidity. Early diagnosis and treatment are important

Table 116-1 Features of Sexually Transmitted Infections Caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae* FEATURE C. TRACHOMATIS N. GONORRHOEAE Incubation period 5–12 days 3–14 days Possible presentations Pharyngitis, conjunctivitis (including neonatal conjunctivitis), disseminated disease (arthritis, dermatitis, endocarditis, meningitis)

Signs/symptoms of common syndromes

Mucopurulent cervicitis Cervical erythema, friability, with thick creamy discharge >10 PMNs/hpf Mild cervical tenderness Gram-negative intracellular diplococci

Pelvic inflammatory disease Onset of symptoms day 3–10 of menstrual cycle

Adnexal tenderness, mass (95%)

Nausea, vomiting (variable)

Weakness, syncope, dizziness (variable)

Diagnostic tests NAAT, culture (using Thayer-Martin selective media) NAAT hpf, High-powered field; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; PID, pelvic inflammatory disease; PMN, polymorphonuclear cells. *Coinfection is common, and clinical presentations have significant overlap. Table 116-2 Features of Sexually Transmitted Infections Characterized by Genital Ulcers SYPHILIS GENITAL HERPES CHANCROID GRANULOMA INGUINALE (DONOVANOSIS) Agent Treponema pallidum HSV-1, HSV-2 Haemophilus ducreyi Klebsiella granulomatis

Primary lesion Papule Vesicle Papule to pustule Papule

Number >1 Multiple <3 >1, may coalesce

Edges Distinct Reddened, ragged Ragged, undermined Rolled, distinct

Base Red, smooth Red, smooth Necrotic Beefy red, clean

Secretion Serous Serous Pus, blood None

Isolation No in vitro test; rabbit Culture Aspirate of node, swab of None inoculation

Treatment Early: Benzathine penicillin G Acyclovir or famciclovir or Aspirate fluctuant nodes Doxycycline or TMP-SMX (2.4 million U IM) once valacyclovir

Late (>1 yr duration):

Incision and drainage Benzathine penicillin G (2.4

FTA-ABS, Fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorption; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MHA-TP, microhemagglutination assay-Treponema pallidum; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory. Table 116-3 Features of Sexually Transmitted Infections Characterized by Vaginal Discharge FEATURE PHYSIOLOGIC LEUKORRHEA (NORMAL) TRICHOMONIASIS BACTERIAL VAGINOSIS (GARDNERELLA VAGINALIS-ASSOCIATED VAGINITIS) Agent Normal flora Trichomonas vaginalis G. vaginalis and anaerobes

Pruritus None Mild to moderate None to mild

Discharge Minimal Moderate to severe Mild to moderate

Characteristics of discharge

Color Clear, milky Yellow-green or grey Grey

Odor with None Possible Characteristic fishy odor pH <4.5 >5.0 >4.5

Saline drop Squamous and few WBCs WBC; Motile flagellates, slightly Squamous cells studded with larger than WBCs bacteria (“clue cells”) and WBCs

Treatment Reassurance Metronidazole or tinidazole Metronidazole, tinidazole, or clindamycin

KOH, Potassium hydroxide; WBCs, white blood cells.
); actual pathology if possibleAssess present history against this background (for example, granulosa cell pathology, is it now recurrent? )Pain historySite, location, relationship (with urination, with menses, with intercourse at initiation or deep penetration, with bowel movements), referralAssesses relationship to other organ systems,  and potential involvement of these with process. Common examples presenting as pelvic pain,  ureteral stone, endometriosis with bowel  involvement, etcBrunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178818/02/19   4:34 PM 1789GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41or clotting issues and history, and drug exposure, allergies, and current medications must be addressed.Commonly Used Testinga-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin Testing. Qualitative uri-nary pregnancy tests for human chorionic gonadotropin (b-hCG) are standard prior to any surgery in a woman of reproductive age and potential, regardless of contraception history. In addition, serum quantitative b-hCG testing is appropriate for evaluation of suspected ectopic pregnancy, gestational trophoblastic dis-ease, or ovarian mass in a young woman. In the case of ectopic pregnancy, serial levels are required when a pregnancy cannot be identified in the uterine cavity by imaging. As a general rule, 85% of viable, very early intrauterine pregnancies will have at least a 66% rise in the b-hCG level over 48 hours.Table 41-2Features of common causes of vaginitis BACTERIAL VAGINOSISVULVOVAGINAL CANDIDIASISTRICHOMONIASISPathogenAnaerobic organismsCandida albicansTrichomonas vaginalis% of vaginitis403020pH>4.5<4.5>4.5Signs and symptomsMalodorous, adherent dischargeWhite discharge, vulvar erythema, pruritus, dyspareuniaMalodorous purulent discharge, vulvovaginal erythema, dyspareuniaWet mountClue cellsPseudohyphae or budding yeasts in 40% of casesMotile trichomonadsKOH mount Pseudohyphae or budding yeasts in 70% of cases Amine test+−−TreatmentMetronidazole 500 mg twice a day for 7 d or 2 g single dose, metronidazole or clindamycin vaginal creamOral fluconazole 150 mg single dose, vaginal antifungal preparationsMetronidazole 2 g single dose and treatment of partner+ = positive; − = negative; KOH = potassium hydroxide.Figure 41-7. Bimanual abdominovaginal palpation of the uterus.Microscopy of Vaginal Discharge. During a speculum exam, a cotton-tipped applicator is used to collect the vaginal dis-charge; it is smeared on a slide with several drops of 0.9% nor-mal saline to create a saline wet mount. A cover slide is placed and the slide is evaluated microscopically for the presence of mobile trichomonads (Trichomonas vaginalis) or clue cells (epithelial cells studded with bacteria, seen in bacterial vagi-nosis; Table 41-2). A potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mount is the slide application of the collected vaginal discharge with 10% KOH; this destroys cellular elements. The test is posi-tive for vaginal candidiasis when pseudohyphae are seen (see  Table 41-2).Chlamydia/Gonorrhea Testing. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) has emerged as the diagnostic test of choice for N gonorrhea and C trachomatis. A vaginal swab, endocervical swab, and/or urine sample, can be used for this test.Cervical Cancer Screening and Prevention. HPV infection is required for the development of epithelial cervical carcino-mas (squamous and adenocarcinomas), and HPV DNA can be identified in virtually all primary cervical malignancies.
Look for pathology. Patients may have a palpable uterine mass, cervical motion tenderness, adnexal tenderness, a vaginal or cervical discharge, or visible vaginal pathology (mucosal tears, masses, prolapse). However, normal abdominal and pelvic exams do not rule out pathology. See Table 2.12-4 for distinguishing features of endometriosis vs. adenomyosis. First step: Obtain a β-hCG to exclude ectopic pregnancy. Second step: Order the following:

A CBC with differential to rule out infection or neoplasm. UA to rule out UTI. Gonococcal/chlamydial swabs to rule out STDs/PID. Stool guaiac to rule out GI pathology. Third step: Look for pelvic pathology causing pain (see Table 2.12-4). Treatment is etiology specif c.

T AB LE 2.1 2-4. Endometriosis vs. Adenomyosis

Def nition Functional endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. Endometrial tissue in the myometrium of the uterus. History/PE Presents with cyclical pelvic and/or rectal pain and dyspareunia (painful intercourse). Presents with the classic triad of noncyclical pain, menorrhagia, and an enlarged uterus.
Such attachment prevents the organism from being unceremoniously flushed away by body fluids such as urine or endocervical mucus. The organism then penetrates through the epithelial cells to invade the deeper tissues of the host. MORPHOLOGYN. gonorrhoeae provokesanintense,suppurativeinflammatoryreaction.Inmales,thismanifestsmostoftenasapurulenturethraldischarge,associatedwithanedematous,congestedurethralmeatus.Gram-negativediplococci,manywithinthecytoplasmofneutrophils,arereadilyidentifiedinGramstainsofthepurulentexudate(

Fig.18.21 ).Ascendinginfectionmayresultinthedevelopmentofacuteprostatitis,epididymitis(

Fig.18.22 ),ororchitis.Abscessesmaycomplicateseverecases.Urethralandendocervicalexudatestendtobelessconspicuousinfemales,althoughacuteinflammationofadjacentstructures,suchastheBartholinglands,isfairlycommon.Ascendinginfectioninvolvingtheuterus,fallopiantubes,andovariesresultsinacutesalpingitis,sometimescomplicatedbytuboovarianabscesses.Theacuteinflammatoryprocessisfollowedbythedevelopmentofgranulationtissueandscarring,withresultantstricturesandotherpermanentdeformitiesoftheinvolvedstructures,givingrisetopelvic inflammatory disease (Chapter19). Fig. 18.21 Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Gramstainofurethraldischargedemon-stratescharacteristicgram-negative,intracellulardiplococci(arrow). (Courtesy of Dr. Rita Gander, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas,Texas.) Fig. 18.22 Acuteepididymitiscausedbygonococcalinfection.Theepididy-misisinvolvedbyanabscess.Normaltestisisseenontheright. http://ebooksmedicine.net

In most infected males, gonorrhea is manifested by the presence of dysuria, urinary frequency, and a mucopurulent urethral exudate within 2 to 14 days of the time of initial infection. However, urethral gonococcal infection can be detected in 40% of asymptomatic male contacts of women with symptomatic gonorrhea. Treatment with appropriate anti-microbial therapy results in eradication of the organism and prompt resolution of symptoms. Untreated infections may ascend to involve the prostate, seminal vesicles, epididymis, and testis. Neglected cases may be complicated by chronic urethral stricture and, in more advanced cases, by permanent sterility.
Although some male patients with LUTS may have BPE, not all patients with an enlarged prostate have LUTS. The prevalence of LUTS attributed to BPH in men over the age of 50 is estimated at 50% to 75% and increases with age with a prevalence of 80% in men over the age of 70.20 The treatment modalities have dramatically evolved over the past decades, with medical management typically used for first-line therapy. Endoscopic and minimally invasive techniques are used for those failing or intolerant of medical therapy.Men with BPH/LUTS are evaluated with a complete his-tory and physical exam including digital rectal exam. LUTS should be clearly defined, in addition to their severity and degree of bother. Validated questionnaires to quantify the patient’s symptoms and degree of bother include the American Urologi-cal Association Symptom Index (AUA-SI) and the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS).21,22 Complications of BPH such as urinary retention, incontinence, renal failure, hema-turia, or recurrent infections should also be considered. Basic workup includes a urinalysis and culture to rule out infection. After an informative discussion about the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening, a serum PSA is measured when life expectancy is >10 years and if the diagnosis of prostate can-cer will alter management.23 Other diagnostic testing such as cystoscopy, cytology, postvoid residual (PVR), urodynamics, and radiologic imaging of the prostate, although not done rou-tinely, may be required in patients with a definite indication (e.g., hematuria), uncertain diagnosis, poor response to therapy, or for surgical planning.24The first line of treatment is most commonly pharmaco-therapy for those men with bothersome symptoms. α-Blockers work by relaxing the smooth muscle of the prostate and bladder neck. All α-blocker agents are equally effective,25 and their side effects may include orthostatic hypo-tension, dizziness, asthenia, headache, nasal congestion, and retrograde ejaculation. Their effect is usually seen within days. Five-α reductase inhibitors (5-ARIs) block the conversion of 2Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176301/03/19   6:34 PM 1764SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItestosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the hormone primar-ily responsible for BPH progression. These reduce prostatic size by 20% to 25%,26 but their effects are seen only after 4 to 6 months. Side effects include erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, and, rarely, gynecomastia. 5-ARIs, but not α-blockers, can alter disease progression as demonstrated by two landmark tri-als, the MTOPS27 and CombAT28 trials. These trials evaluated combination therapy using α-blockers and 5-ARIs.
On DRE, the prostate is uniformly enlarged with a rubbery texture. If the prostate is hard or has irregular lesions, cancer should be suspected. Conduct a DRE to screen for masses; if findings are suspicious, evaluate for prostate cancer. Obtain a UA and urine culture to rule out infection and hematuria. Measure creatinine levels to rule out obstructive uropathy and renal insufficiency. PSA testing and cystoscopy are not recommended for longitudinal BPH monitoring. Medical therapy includes α-blockers (e.g., terazosin), which relax smooth muscle in the prostate and bladder neck, as well as 5α-reductase inhibitors (e.g., finasteride), which inhibit the production of dihydrotestosterone. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) or open prostatectomy is appropriate for patients with moderate to severe symptoms. The most common cancer in men and the second leading cause of cancer death in men (after lung cancer). Risk factors include advanced age and a family history. Usually asymptomatic, but may present with obstructive urinary symptoms (e.g., urinary retention, a ↓ in the force of the urine stream) as well as with lymphedema due to obstructing metastases, constitutional symptoms, and back pain due to bone metastases. DRE may reveal a palpable nodule or an area of induration. Early carcinoma is usually not detectable on exam. A tender prostate suggests prostatitis. What drugs are an absolute contraindication to sildenaf l?
It is not known whether long-term testosterone administration will induce these microscopic foci to grow into clinically significant cancers. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are lower in testosterone-deficient men and are restored to normal after testosterone replacement. There is considerable test-retest variability in PSA measurements. Increments in PSA levels after testosterone supplementation in androgen-deficient men are generally <0.5 ng/mL, and increments >1.0 ng/mL over a 3to 6-month period are unusual. The 90% confidence interval for the change in PSA values in men with benign prostatic hypertrophy, measured 3–6 months apart, is 1.4 ng/mL. Therefore, the Endocrine Society expert panel suggested that an increase in PSA >1.4 ng/mL in any 1 year after starting testosterone therapy, if confirmed, should lead to urologic evaluation. PSA velocity criterion can be used for patients who have sequential PSA measurements for >2 years; a change of >0.40 ng/mL per year merits closer urologic follow-up. cardiovaScular riSK In epidemiologic studies, testosterone concentrations are negatively related to the risk of diabetes mellitus, heart disease, and all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. A recent testosterone trial in older men with mobility limitation was stopped early because of the higher rates of cardiovascular events in the testosterone arm than in the placebo arm of this trial. Meta-analyses 2374 of testosterone trials have found a significant increase in cardiovascular event rates in older men receiving testosterone therapy. Inferences about adverse events from previous trials included in these meta-analyses are limited by poor ascertainment, small numbers of events, heterogeneity of study populations, and small numbers of participants. Two retrospective analyses also found a higher frequency of cardiovascular events in association with testosterone therapy in older men with preexisting heart disease. Retrospective database analyses are limited by their inherent inability to verify the indication for treatment, diagnoses, or other relevant quantitative information and are susceptible to confounding by many other factors. Adequately powered prospective studies are needed to determine the effect on testosterone replacement on cardiovascular risk. Androgen Abuse by Athletes and Recreational Bodybuilders The illicit use of androgenic-anabolic steroids (AAS) to enhance athletic performance first surfaced in the 1950s among power lifters and spread rapidly to other sports, professional as well as high school athletes, and recreational bodybuilders.
The relative risk of prostate events and the associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs) in a meta-analysis of randomized testosterone trials. PSA, prostate-specific antigen. (Data were derived from a meta-analysis by MM Fernández-Balsells et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:2560, 2010, and the figure was reproduced with permission from M Spitzer et al: Nat Rev Endocrinol 9:414, 2013.) One randomized testosterone trial in older men with mobility limi-Population screening of all older men for low testosterone levtation and high burden of chronic conditions, such as diabetes, heart els is not recommended, and testing should be restricted to men disease, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, reported a greater number who have symptoms or physical features attributable to androof cardiovascular events in men randomized to the testosterone arm of gen deficiency. Testosterone therapy is not recommended for all the study than in those randomized to the placebo arm. Since then, two older men with low testosterone levels. In older men with siglarge retrospective analyses of patient databases have reported higher nificant symptoms of androgen deficiency who have testosterone frequency of cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarction, in levels below 200 ng/dL, testosterone therapy may be considered on older men with preexisting heart disease (Fig. 411-7). an individualized basis and should be instituted after careful discussion of the risks and benefits (see “Testosterone Replacement,” below). Testicular morphology, semen production, and fertility are maintained up to a very old age in men. Although concern has been expressed about age-related increases in germ cell mutations and impairment of DNA repair mechanisms, there is no clear evidence that the frequency of chromosomal aneuploidy is increased in the sperm of older men. However, the incidence of autosomal dominant diseases, such as achondroplasia, polyposis coli, Marfan’s syndrome, and Apert’s syndrome, increases in the offspring of men who are advanced in age, consistent with transmission of sporadic missense mutations. Advanced paternal age may be associated with increased rates of de novo mutations, which may contribute to an increased risk of neurodevelopmental diseases such as schizophrenia and autism. The somatic mutations in male germ cells that enhance the proliferation of germ cells could lead to within-testis expansion of mutant clonal lines, thus favoring the propagation of germ cells carrying these pathogenic mutations and increasing the risk of mutations in the offspring of older fathers (the “selfish spermatogonial selection” hypothesis). APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Hypogonadism is often characterized by decreased sex drive, reduced frequency of sexual activity, inability to maintain erections, reduced beard growth, loss of muscle mass, decreased testicular size, and gynecomastia.
“Point and Shoot”: The Parasympathetic nervous system mediates erection; the Sympathetic nervous system mediates ejaculation. ■ Evaluate for neurologic dysfunction (e.g., anal tone, lower extremity sensation) and for hypogonadism (e.g., small testes, loss of 2° sexual characteristics). Testosterone and gonadotropin levels may be abnormal. Check prolactin levels, as elevated prolactin can result in ↓ androgen activity. Patients with psychological ED may benefit from psychotherapy or sex therapy involving discussion and exercises with the appropriate partner. Oral sildenafl (Viagra), vardenafl (Levitra), and tadalaf l (Cialis) are phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitors that result in prolonged action of cGMP-mediated smooth muscle relaxation and ↑ blood ﬂow in the corpora cavernosa. Testosterone is a useful therapy for patients with hypogonadism of testicular or pituitary origin; it is discouraged for patients with normal testosterone levels. Vacuum pumps, intracavernosal prostaglandin injections, and surgical implantation of semirigid or inﬂatable penile prostheses are alternatives for patients who fail PDE5 therapy. Enlargement of the prostate that is a normal part of the aging process and is seen in > 80% of men by age 80. Most commonly presents in men > 50 years of age. BPH can result in urinary retention, recurrent UTIs, bladder and renal calculi, hydronephrosis, and kidney damage over time. Obstructive symptoms: Hesitancy, weak stream, intermittent stream, incomplete emptying, urinary retention, bladder fullness. Irritative symptoms: Nocturia, daytime frequency, urge incontinence, opening hematuria. On DRE, the prostate is uniformly enlarged with a rubbery texture. If the prostate is hard or has irregular lesions, cancer should be suspected.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
B.Why are ketone bodies not elevated? Case 3: Hyperglycemia and Hyperketonemia

Patient Presentation: MW, a 40-year-old woman, was brought to the hospital in a disoriented, confused state by her husband. Focused History: As noted on her medical alert bracelet, MW has had type 1 diabetes (T1D) for the last 24 years. Her husband reports that this is her first medical emergency in 2 years. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): MW displayed signs of dehydration (such as dry mucous membranes and skin, poor skin turgor, and low blood pressure) and acidosis (such as deep, rapid breathing [Kussmaul respiration]). Her breath had a faintly fruity odor. Her temperature was normal. Pertinent Test Results: Rapid, bedside tests were strongly positive for glucose and acetoacetate and negative for protein. Results on blood tests performed by the clinical laboratory are shown below:

H=High;L=Low. Microscopic examination of her urine revealed a urinary tract infection (UTI). Diagnosis: MW is in diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) that was precipitated by a UTI. [Note: Diabetes increases the risk for infections such as UTI.] Immediate Treatment: MW was rehydrated with normal saline given intravenously (IV). She also was given insulin IV. Blood glucose, ketone bodies, and electrolytes were measured periodically.
Zandi PP et al: Hormone replacement therapy and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in older women. JAMA 2002;288:2123. The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her osteoporosis. Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD, & Umesh Masharani, MBBS, MRCP (UK)

A 66-year-old obese Caucasian man presented to an academic Diabetes Center for advice regarding his diabetes treatment. His diabetes was diagnosed 10 years previously on routine testing. He was initially given metformin but when his control deteriorated, the metformin was stopped and insulin treatment initiated. The patient was taking 50 units of insulin glargine and an average of 25 units of insulin aspartate pre-meals. He had never seen a diabetes educator or a dietitian. He was checking his glucose levels 4 times a day. He was smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day. On examination, his weight was 132 kg (BMI 39.5); blood pressure 145/71; and signs of mild peripheral neuropathy were present. Laboratory tests noted an HbA1c value of 8.1%, urine albumin 3007 mg/g creatinine (normal <30), serum creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (0.61–1.24), total choles-terol 128 mg/dL, triglycerides 86 mg/dL, HDL cholesterol 38 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 73 mg/dL (on atorvastatin 40 mg daily). How would you treat this patient?
b Risk factors = cigarette smoking, hypertension, low HDL (< 40 mg/dL), a family history of premature CAD, and age (men > 45 years; women > 55 years). An HDL > 60 mg/dL counts as a “negative” risk factor and removes one risk factor from the total score. ■LDL > 130 mg/dL or HDL < 40 mg/dL, even if total serum cholesterol is < 200 mg/dL, is diagnostic of dyslipidemia. Based on risk stratification (see Table 2.1-11). Risk factors include diabetes (considered a CAD risk equivalent), smoking, hypertension, HDL < 40 mg/dL, age > 45 (males), age > 55 (females), and early CAD in first-degree relatives (males < 55 and females < 65). The first intervention should be a 12-week trial of diet and exercise in a patient with no known atherosclerotic vascular disease. Commonly used lipid-lowering agents are listed in Table 2.1-12. The BP goal in uncomplicated hypertension is < 140/< 90. For diabetics or patients with renal disease, the goal is < 130/< 80. Defined as a systolic BP > 140 mmHg and/or a diastolic BP > 90 based on three measurements separated in time (see Table 2.1-13). Classified as 1° or 2°. Hypertension with no identifiable cause. Represents 95% of cases of hypertension. Risk factors include a family history of hypertension or heart disease, a high-sodium diet, smoking, obesity, race (blacks > whites), and advanced age. Hypertension is asymptomatic until complications develop.
3. Assess:

Serum electrolytes (K+, Na+, Mg2+, Cl−, bicarbonate, phosphate)

Acid-base status—pH, HCO3−, PCO2, β-hydroxybutyrate

Renal function (creatinine, urine output) 4. Replace fluids: 2–3 L of 0.9% saline over first 1–3 h (10–20 mL/kg per hour); subsequently, 0.45% saline at 250–500 mL/h; change to 5% glucose and 0.45% saline at 150–250 mL/h when plasma glucose reaches 250 mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L). 5. Administer short-acting insulin: IV (0.1 units/kg), then 0.1 units/kg per hour by continuous IV infusion; increase twoto threefold if no response by 2–4 h. If the initial serum potassium is <3.3 mmol/L (3.3 meq/L), do not administer insulin until the potassium is corrected. 6. Assess patient: What precipitated the episode (noncompliance, infection, trauma, pregnancy, infarction, cocaine)? Initiate appropriate workup for precipitating event (cultures, CXR, ECG). 7. Measure capillary glucose every 1–2 h; measure electrolytes (especially K+, bicarbonate, phosphate) and anion gap every 4 h for first 24 h.

8. Monitor blood pressure, pulse, respirations, mental status, fluid intake and output every 1–4 h.

9. Replace K+: 10 meq/h when plasma K+ <5.0–5.2 meq/L (or 20–30 meq/L of infusion fluid), ECG normal, urine flow and normal creatinine documented; administer 40–80 meq/h when plasma K+ <3.5 meq/L or if bicarbonate is given. If initial serum potassium is >5.2 mmol/L (5.2 meq/L), do not supplement K+ until the potassium is corrected. 10. See text about bicarbonate or phosphate supplementation.
Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be important in this patient. The echocardiogram demon-strates impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amiodarone, would be appropriate. The use of catheter ablation for treatment of the initial episode of atrial fibril-lation is not the standard of care but is undergoing clinical trials. Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization? Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are common and important clinical disorders.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
Move P.M. insulin closer to bedtime to treat. Acute complications Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS) Hyperglycemia-induced crisis that most commonly occurs in type 1 DM. Often precipitated by stress (including infections, MI, trauma, or alcohol) or by noncompliance with insulin therapy. May present with abdominal pain, vomiting, Kussmaul respirations, and a fruity, acetone breath odor. Patients are severely dehydrated with many electrolyte abnormalities and may also develop mental status changes. Treatment includes f uids, potassium, insulin, bicarbonate (if pH is < 7), and treatment of the initiating event or underlying disease process. Presents as profound dehydration, mental status changes, hyperosmolarity, and extremely high plasma glucose (> 600 mg/dL) without acidosis and with small or absent ketones. Occurs in type 2 DM; precipitated by acute stress (dehydration, infections) and often can be fatal. Treatment includes aggressive ﬂuid and electrolyte replacement and insulin. Treat the initiating event. Chronic complications Retinopathy (nonproliferative, proliferative) Diabetic nephropathy Neuropathy Macrovascular complications Appears when diabetes has been present for at least 3–5 years. Preventive measures include control of hyperglycemia and hypertension, annual eye exams, and laser photocoagulation therapy for retinal neovascularization. Characterized by glomerular hyperfltration followed by microalbuminuria. Preventive measures include ACEIs or ARBs and BP/glucose control. Peripheral, symmetric, sensorimotor neuropathy leading to burning pain, foot trauma, infections, and diabetic ulcers.
3. Results in hyperglycemia (> 300 mg/dL), anion gap metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia 4. Presents with Kussmaul respirations, dehydration, nausea, vomiting, mental status changes, and fruity smelling breath (due to acetone) 5. Treatment is fluids (corrects dehydration from polyuria), insulin, and replacement of electrolytes (e.g., potassium). Ill. TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS

A. End-organ insulin resistance leading to a metabolic disorder characterized by hyperglycemia 1. Most common type of diabetes (90% of cases); affects 5-10% of the US population 2. Incidence is rising. B. Arises in middle-aged, obese adults 1. Obesity leads to decreased numbers of insulin receptors. 2. Strong genetic predisposition exists. C. Insulin levels are increased early in disease, but later, insulin deficiency develops due to beta cell exhaustion; histology reveals amyloid deposition in the islets (Fig. 15.12). D. Clinical features include polyuria, polydipsia, and hyperglycemia, but disease is often clinically silent.
Granberg S, Wikland M, Karlsson B, et al. Endometrial thickness as measured by endovaginal ultrasonography for identifying endometrial abnormality. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:47–52. 86. Varner RE, Sparks JM, Cameron CD, et al. Transvaginal sonography of the endometrium in postmenopausal women. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:195–199. 87. Karlsson B, Granberg S, Wikland M, et al. Transvaginal ultrasonography of the endometrium in women with postmenopausal bleeding: a Nordic multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1488–1494. 88. Tabor A, Watt HC, Wald NJ. Endometrial thickness as a test for endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1488–1494.
Metrorrhagia: Bleeding between periods. Menometrorrhagia: Excessive and irregular bleeding. Pelvic exam: Look for an enlarged uterus, a cervical mass, or polyps to assess for myomas, pregnancy, or cervical cancer. First step: Obtain a β-hCG to rule out ectopic pregnancy. Second step: Order a CBC to rule out anemia. Third step:

Pap smear to rule out cervical cancer (which can present with bleeding). TFTs to rule out hyper-/hypothyroidism and hyperprolactinemia. Obtain platelet count, bleeding time, and PT/PTT to rule out von Willebrand’s disease and factor XI def ciency. Order an ultrasound to evaluate the ovaries, uterus, and endometrium. Look for uterine masses, polycystic ovaries, and thickness of the endometrium. If the endometrium is ≥ 4 mm in a postmenopausal woman, obtain an endometrial biopsy. An endometrial biopsy should also be obtained if the patient is > 35 years of age, obese (BMI > 35), and diabetic. Heavy bleeding: Since heavy or prolonged uterine bleeding has likely denuded the endometrial cavity, estrogen is needed to rapidly promote endometrial growth. First step: For hemorrhage, high-dose estrogen IV stabilizes the endometrial lining and stops bleeding within one hour. Next step: If bleeding is not controlled within 12–24 hours, a D&C is indicated.
252. Savelli L, De Iaco P, Santini D, et al. Histopathologic features and risk factors for benignity, hyperplasia, and cancer in endometrial polyps. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:927–931. 253. Karlsson B, Granberg S, Wikland M, et al. Transvaginal ultrasonography of the endometrium in women with postmenopausal bleeding—a Nordic multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995; 172:1488–1494. 254. Epstein E, Valentin L. Managing women with post-menopausal bleeding. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2004;18:125–143. 255. Timmermans A, Opmeer BC, Khan KS, et al. Endometrial thickness measurement for detecting endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:160–167.
Endometrial thickness as a test for endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1488–1494. 89. Silverberg SG, Kurman RJ. Tumors of the uterine corpus and gestational trophoblastic disease (3rd series). Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1992. 90. Hendrickson MR, Ross JC, Kempson RL. Toward the development of morphologic criteria for well differentiated adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Am J Surg Pathol 1983;7:819–838. 91. Norris HJ, Tavassoli FA, Kurman RJ. Endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma: diagnostic considerations. Am J Surg Pathol 1983;7:839– 847. 92.
Endometrial thickness measurement for detecting endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:160–167. 256. Castelo-Branco C, Cancelo MJ, Villero J, et al. Management of post-menopausal vaginal atrophy and atrophic vaginitis. Maturitas 2005;52(Suppl 1):S46–S52. 257. Santoro N, Komi J. Prevalence and impact of vaginal symptoms among postmenopausal women. JSexMed 2009;6:2133–2142. 258. Dorr MB, Nelson AL, Mayer PR, et al. Plasma estrogen concentrations after oral and vaginal estrogen administration in women with atrophic vaginitis. Fertil Steril 2010;94:2365–2368. 259.
Treatment Once symptoms begin, it is not clear if any treatment is of consistent value. One’s first impulse, assuming the mechanism to be autoimmune, is to administer high doses of corticosteroids, a practice we have followed but without conviction. Perhaps it is advisable to do so, but there is as yet no evidence that this alters the course of the illness. We have also used plasma exchange or intravenous immune globulin in several patients with uncertain results, although this approach was seemingly helpful in a few patients who had an explosive clinical onset. The prognosis of this illness is better than the initial symptoms might suggest. Invariably, the myelitic disease improves, sometimes to a surprising degree, but there are examples in which the sequelae have been severe and permanent. Pain in the midthoracic region or an abrupt, severe onset usually indicates a poor prognosis (Ropper and Poskanzer). The authors have several times given a good prognosis for long-term recovery and assurance that no relapse will occur, only to witness a recrudescence of other symptoms at a later date, indicating that the original illness was probably multiple sclerosis. Acute Demyelinating Myelitis of Multiple Sclerosis (Chap. 35)

The lesions of acute MS share many of the features of the postinfectious type as noted above. However, the clinical manifestations of the former tend to evolve more slowly, over a period of 1 to 3 weeks or even longer. Also, a relation to antecedent infections is not often seen in MS. Only the occurrence of subsequent attacks or additional lesions revealed by MRI or evoked potentials indicates that the basic illness is one of chronic recurrent demyelination. The most typical of clinical expression of demyelinating myelitis is with numbness that spreads over one or both sides of the body from the sacral segments to the feet, anterior thighs, and up over the trunk, with coincident but variable and usually asymmetric weakness and then paralysis of the legs. As this process becomes complete, the bladder is also affected. The sensorimotor disturbance may extend to involve the arms, and a sensory level can be demonstrated on the upper parts of the trunk.
Hallett M, Lindsey JW, Adelstein BD, Riley PO: Controlled trial of isoniazid therapy for severe postural cerebellar tremor in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 35:1314, 1985. Halliday AM, McDonald WI: Pathophysiology of demyelinating disease. Br Med Bull 33:21, 1977. Hartung HP, Gonsette R, Konig H, et al: Mitoxantrone in progressive multiple sclerosis: A placebo-controlled, double-blind randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet 360:2018, 2002. Hauser SL, Bresnan MJ, Reinherz EL, Weiner HL: Childhood multiple sclerosis: Clinical features and demonstration of changes in T-cell subsets with disease activity. Ann Neurol 11:463, 1982. Hauser SL, Dawson DM, Lehrich JR: Intensive immune suppression in progressive multiple sclerosis: A randomized three arm study of high-dose intravenous cyclophosphamide, plasma exchange and ACTH. N Engl J Med 308:173, 1983. Hauser SA, Waubant E, Arnold DL, et al: B-cell depletion with rituximab in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 358:676, 2008. Hely MA, McManis PG, Doran TJ, et al: Acute optic neuritis: A prospective study of risk factors for multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 49:1125, 1986. Hemachudha T, Griffin DE, Giffels JJ, et al: Myelin basic protein as an encephalitogen in encephalomyelitis and polyneuritis following rabies vaccination.
Lancet 349:589, 1997. Fisher RS, Clark AW, Wolinsky JS, et al: Post-infectious leukoencephalitis complicating Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. Arch Neurol 40:109, 1983. Frohman TC, Galetta S, Fox R, et al: The medial longitudinal fasciculus in ocular motor physiology. Neurol 2008;70:e57–e67. Geny C, Ngeyen JP, Pollin B, et al: Improvement in severe postural cerebellar tremor in multiple sclerosis by thalamic stimulation. Mov Disord 11:489, 1996. Gilbert JJ, Sadler M: Unsuspected multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol 40:533, 1983. Gold R, Kappos L, Arnold DL, et al: Placebo-Controlled Phase 3 Study of Oral BG-12 for Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis. N Engl J Med; 367:1098, 2012. Goodkin DE, Rudick RA, Medendorp V, et al: Low-dose oral methotrexate in chronic progressive multiple sclerosis. Neurology 47:1153, 1996. Hallett M, Lindsey JW, Adelstein BD, Riley PO: Controlled trial of isoniazid therapy for severe postural cerebellar tremor in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 35:1314, 1985.
32)

As the neurology of AIDS has been elucidated, the clinical and pathologic characteristics of a viral myelopathy have been studied in detail. The frequency of this condition is impressive—it was present in 20 of 89 successive cases of AIDS on whom a postmortem examination was performed by Petito and colleagues. Often, the clinical symptoms and signs of spinal cord disease are obscured by a neuropathy or one or more of the cerebral disorders that complicate AIDS either because of HIV or due to an opportunistic infection (CMV, toxoplasmosis, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy [PML]). In 5 cases of severe vacuolar myelopathy in the aforementioned series, there was leg or leg and arm weakness, often asymmetrical and developing over a period of weeks, to which the signs of sensory tract involvement and sphincteric disorder were added. A sensory ataxia has also been a common early feature in our experience. The CSF shows a small number of lymphocytes, a slight elevation of protein, and, occasionally, bizarre giant cells. The white matter of the spinal cord is vacuolated, by which is meant a ballooning within myelin sheaths of the long tracts. The changes are most severe in thoracic segments with the posterior and lateral columns are affected diffusely. Axons are involved to a lesser degree, and lipid-laden macrophages are present in abundance. Similar vacuolar lesions may be seen in the brain in some cases. The lesions in the spinal cord resemble those of subacute combined degeneration but levels of vitamin B12 and folic acid are normal. (A similar lesion was found in one of our patients with myelopathy from chronic lupus erythematosus.) The antiretroviral drugs that slow the progress of AIDS, with the exception of a few cases, seem to have little effect on the myelopathy and one can only resort to symptomatic treatment of spasticity. This disease was brought to the attention of neurologists 50 years ago through the observations and writings of Cruickshank. However, it is only more recently that a chronic infective-inflammatory disease of the spinal cord caused by the retrovirus HTLV-I has been discovered and its connection to what had been called tropical myelitis, appreciated.
2002, 8:117–118. 16-9 Biologic agents can block cell migration to sites of inflammation and reduce immune responses. Boster, A.L., Nicholas, J.A., Topalli, I., Kisanuki, Y.Y., Pei, W., Morgan-Followell, B., Kirsch, C.F., Racke, M.K., and Pitt, D.: Lessons learned from fatal progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in a patient with multiple sclerosis treated with natalizumab. JAMA Neurol. 2013, 70:398–402. Clifford, D.B., De Luca, A., Simpson, D.M., Arendt, G., Giovannoni, G., and Nath, A.: Natalizumab-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in patients with multiple sclerosis: lessons from 28 cases. Lancet Neurol. 2010, 9:438–446. Cyster, J.G. : Chemokines, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and cell migration in secondary lymphoid organs. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 23:127–159. Idzko, M., Hammad, H., van Nimwegen, M., Kool, M., Muller, T., Soullie, T., Willart, M.A., Hijdra, D., Hoogsteden, H.C., and Lambrecht, B.N.
These can be used in combinations with each other or with a low dose statin. If all else fails, use of a PCSK9 monoclonal antibody should be con-sidered. Her homocysteine level should be measured because of the synergy between that amino acid and Lp(a) with respect to thrombotic risk. Also, because of her elevated Lp(a), she should be evaluated for aortic stenosis. Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout

Ahmed A. Negm, MD, & Daniel E. Furst, MD twice daily. His symptoms are reduced at this dosage, but he com-plains of significant heartburn that is not controlled by antacids. He is then switched to celecoxib, 200 mg twice daily, and on this regimen his joint symptoms and heartburn resolve. Two years later, he returns with increased joint symptoms. His hands, wrists, elbows, feet, and knees are all now involved and appear swollen, warm, and tender. What therapeutic options should be considered at this time? What are the possible complications? A 48-year-old man presents with complaints of bilateral morning stiffness in his wrists and knees and pain in these joints on exercise. On physical examination, the joints are slightly swollen. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. His laboratory findings are also negative except for slight anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate, and positive rheumatoid factor.
Surgical procedures may improve pain and disability in RA—most notably the hands, wrists, and feet, typically after the failure of medical therapy with varying degrees of reported long-term success. For large joints, such as the knee, hip, shoulder, or elbow, total joint arthroplasty is an option for advanced joint disease. A few surgical options exist for dealing with the smaller hand joints. Silicone implants are the most common prosthetic for MCP arthroplasty and are generally implanted in patients with severe decreased arc of motion, marked flexion contractures, MCP joint pain with radiographic abnormalities, and severe ulnar drift. Arthrodesis and total wrist arthroplasty are reserved for patients with severe disease who have substantial pain and functional impairment. These two procedures appear to have equal efficacy in terms of pain control and patient satisfaction. Numerous surgical options exist for correction of hallux valgus in the forefoot, including arthrodesis and arthroplasty, as well as primarily arthrodesis for refractory hindfoot pain. OTHEr MaNaGEMENT CONSIDEraTIONS Pregnancy Up to 75% of female RA patients will note overall improvement in symptoms during pregnancy, but often will flare after delivery. Flares during pregnancy are generally treated with low doses of prednisone; hydroxychloroquine and sulfasalazine are probably the safest DMARDs to use during pregnancy. Methotrexate and leflunomide therapy are contraindicated during pregnancy due to their teratogenicity in animals and humans. The experience with biologic agents has been insufficient to make specific recommendations for their use during pregnancy. Most rheumatologists avoid their use in this setting; however, exceptions are considered depending on the circumstances. Elderly Patients RA presents in up to one-third of patients after the ageof60;however,olderindividualsmayreceivelessaggressivetreatment due to concerns about increased risks of drug toxicity. Studies suggest that conventional DMARDs and biologic agents are equally effective and safe in younger and older patients. Due to comorbidities, many elderly patients have an increased risk of infection.
Studies suggest that conventional DMARDs and biologic agents are equally effective and safe in younger and older patients. Due to comorbidities, many elderly patients have an increased risk of infection. Aging alsoleadstoagradualdeclineinrenalfunctionthatmayraisetherisk for side effects from NSAIDs and some DMARDS, such as methotrexate. Renal function must be taken into consideration before prescribing methotrexate, which is mostly cleared by the kidneys. To reduce the risks of side effects, methotrexate doses may need to be adjusted downward for the drop in renal function that usually comes with the seventh and eighth decades of life. Methotrexate is usually not prescribed for patients with a serum creatinine greater Jonathan R. Carapetis than 2 mg/dL. Developing countries are finding an increase in the incidence of noncommunicable, chronic diseases such as diabetes, car diovascular disease, and RA in the face of ongoing poverty, rampant infectious disease, and poor access to modern health care facilities. In theseareas,patientstend tohavea greater delay indiagnosis and limited access to specialists, and thus greater disease activity and disability at presentation. In addition, infection risk remains a significant issue for the treatment of RA in developing countries because of the immunosuppression associated with the use of glucocorticoids and most DMARDs. For example, in some developing countries, patients undergoing treatment for RA have a substantial increase in the incidence of tuberculosis, which demands the implementation of far more comprehensive screening practices and liberal useofisoniazidprophylaxisthanindevelopedcountries.Theincreased prevalence of hepatitis B and C, as well as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), in these developing countries also poses challenges. Reactivation of viral hepatitis has been observed in association with some of the DMARDs, such as rituximab. Also, reduced access to antiretroviral therapy may limit the control of HIV infection and therefore the choice of DMARD therapies. Despite these challenges, one should attempt to initiate early treatment of RA in the developing countries with the resources at hand. Sulfasalazine and methotrexate are all reasonably accessible throughout the world where they can be used as both monotherapy and in combination with other drugs. The use of biologic agents is increasing in the developedcountriesaswellasinotherareasaroundtheworld,although theiruseislimitedbyhighcost;nationalprotocolsrestricttheiruse,and concerns remain about the risk for opportunistic infections.
In one systematic review, a higher rate of cardiac malformations was found in newborns exposed to NSAIDs in the first trimester (Adams, 2012). In addition, NSAIDs are associated with early spontaneous abortions, ductus arteriosus constriction, and neonatal pulmonary hypertension. Thus, risks versus beneits of these medications must be considered. Glucocorticoid therapy in low-to-moderate doses is given to achieve more rapid symptom control. Of these, prednisone, 7.5 mg orally daily for the first 2 years of active disease, substantively reduces progressive joint erosions (Kirwan, 1995; Shah, 201r5). The American College of Rheumatology recommends several DMARDs that may reduce or prevent joint damage (Singh, 2016). Lelunomide, like methotrexate, is teratogenic (Briggs, 2015) (Chap. 12, p. 241). Sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine are safe for use in pregnancy (Pardett, 201r1). These, combined with COX-2 inhibitors and with relatively low-dose prednisone-7.5 to 20 mg daily-usually successfully treat flares. In one review of drug exposure, a fourth of women with rheumatoid arthritis took a DMARD within 6 months of conception (Kuriya, 2011). During pregnancy, 4 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a category D or X medication. Methotrexate was the most common 2.9 percent. Biological DMARDs have revolutionized the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. These include tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-.)
She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions? The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
Streptococcus agalactiae is a group B organism that can be found to colonize the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tract in 10 to 25 percent of pregnant women (Kwatra, 2016). Throughout pregnancy, group B Streptococcus (GBS) is isolated in a transient, intermittent, or chronic fashion. Although the organism is most likely always present in these same women, their isolation is not always homologous. he spectrum of maternal and fetal G BS efects ranges from asymptomatic colonization to septicemia. S agalactiae has been implicated in adverse pregnancy outcomes that include preterm labor, prematurely ruptured membranes, clinical and subclinical chorioamnionitis, and fetal infections (Randis, 2014). GBS can also cause maternal bacteriuria, pyelonephritis, osteomyelitis, postpartum mastitis, and puerperal infections. It remains the leading infectious cause of morbidity and mortality among infants in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2010; Schrag, 2016). Neonatal sepsis has received the most attention due to its devastating consequences and available efective preventative measures. Infection <7 days after birth is deined as eary-onset disease and is seen in 0.21/1000 live births (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015). Many investigators use a threshold of <72 hours of life as most compatible with intrapartum acquisition of disease (Stoll, 2011). We and others have also encountered unexpected intrapartum stillbirths from GBS infections (Nan, 2015). Tudela and associates (2012) reported that newborns with early-onset CBS infection often had clinical evidence of fetal infection during labor or at delivery. In many neonates, septicemia involves signs of serious illness that usually develop within 6 to 12 hours of birth. These include respiratory distress, apnea, and hypotension. At the outset, therefore, neonatal infection must be diferentiated from respiratory distress syndrome caused by insuicient surfactant production (Chap.
Organisms related to this sepsis include group B streptococci, E. coli, Klebsiella, L. monocytogenes, and nontypeable

H. influenzae. Most infected infants are premature and show nonspecific cardiorespiratory signs, such as grunting, tachypnea, and cyanosis at birth. Risk factors for early-onset sepsis include vaginal colonization with group B streptococci, prolonged rupture of the membranes (>24 hours), amnionitis, maternal fever or leukocytosis, fetal tachycardia, and preterm birth. African American race and male sex are unexplained additional risk factors for neonatal sepsis. Early-onset sepsis (birth to 7 days) is an overwhelming multiorgan system disease frequently manifested as respiratory failure, shock, meningitis (in 30% of cases), disseminated intravascular coagulation, acute tubular necrosis, and symmetrical peripheral gangrene. Early manifestations—grunting, poor feeding, pallor, apnea, lethargy, hypothermia, or an abnormal cry—may be nonspecific. Profound neutropenia, hypoxia, and hypotension may be refractory to treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, mechanical ventilation, and vasopressors such as dopamine and dobutamine. In the initial stages of early-onset septicemia in a preterm infant, it is often difficult to differentiate sepsis from respiratory distress syndrome. Because of this difficulty, premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome receive broad-spectrum antibiotics. The clinical manifestations of sepsis are difficult to separate from the manifestations of meningitis in the neonate. Infants with early-onset sepsis should be evaluated by blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures, CSF Gram stain, cell count, and protein and glucose levels. Normal newborns generally have an elevated CSF protein content (100 to 150 mg/dL) and may have 25 to 30/mm3 white blood cells (mean, 9/mm3), which are 75% lymphocytes in the absence of infection. Some infants with neonatal meningitis caused by group B streptococci do not have an elevated CSF leukocyte count but are seen to have microorganisms in the CSF on Gram stain. In addition to culture, other methods of identifying the pathogenic bacteria are the determination of bacterial antigen in samples of blood, urine, or CSF. In cases of neonatal meningitis, the ratio of CSF glucose to blood glucose usually is less than 50%.
In a term infant, this constriction functionally closes the ductus arteriosus within 1 day after birth. A permanent closure requires thrombosis and fibrosis, a process that may take several weeks. In a premature infant, the ductus arteriosus is less sensitive to the effects of oxygen; if circulating levels of vasodilating prostaglandins are elevated, the ductus arteriosus may remain patent. This patency is a common problem in a premature infant with respiratory distress syndrome. Ventilation, oxygenation, and normal pH and Pco2 levels immediately reduce pulmonary artery vasoconstriction bycausing smooth muscle relaxation. Remodeling of the medialmuscle hypertrophy begins at birth and continues for thenext 3 months, resulting in a further reduction of pulmonary vascular resistance and a further increase of pulmonaryblood flow. Persistence or aggravation of pulmonary vasoconstriction caused by acidosis, hypoxia, hypercapnia, hypothermia, polycythemia, asphyxia, shunting of blood from thelungs, or pulmonary parenchymal hypoplasia results in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN). Failure to replace pulmonary alveolar fluid completely withair can lead to respiratory distress (transient tachypnea of the newborn). Silver nitrate (1%) instilled into both eyes without being washed out is an indicated effective therapy for the prevention of neonatal gonococcal ophthalmia, which can result in severe panophthalmitis and subsequent blindness. Silver nitrate may produce a chemical conjunctivitis with a mucopurulent discharge and is not effective against C. trachomatis. Many hospitals use erythromycin drops to prevent neonatal gonococcal and chlamydial eye disease. Bacterial colonization of a newborn may begin in utero if the fetal membranes have been ruptured. Most infants undergo colonization after birth and acquire the bacteria present in the mother’s genitourinary system, such as group B streptococci, staphylococci, E. coli, and clostridia. Antiseptic skin or cord care is routine in most nurseries to prevent the spread of pathologic bacteria from one infant to another and to prevent disease in the individual infant. Staphylococcal bullous impetigo, omphalitis, diarrhea, and systemic disease may result from colonization with virulent S. aureus.
The approach to the birth of an infant requires a detailed history (Table 58-3). Knowing the mother’s risk factors enables the delivery room team to anticipate problems that may occur after birth. The history of a woman’s labor and delivery can reveal events that might lead to complications affecting either the mother or the neonate, even when the pregnancy was previously considered low risk. Anticipating the need to resuscitate a newborn as a result of fetal distress increases the likelihood of successful resuscitation. The transition from fetal to neonatal physiology occurs at birth. Oxygen transport across the placenta results in a gradient between the maternal and fetal Pao2. Although fetal oxygenated blood has a low Pao2 level compared with that of adults and infants, the fetus is not anaerobic. Fetal oxygen uptake and consumption are similar to neonatal rates, even though the thermal environments and activity levels of fetuses and neonates differ. The oxygen content of fetal blood

Age Race Sexually transmitted infections, hepatitis, AIDS Illicit drugs, cigarettes, ethanol, cocaine Immune status (syphilis, rubella, hepatitis B, HIV, blood group) Occupational exposure

Chronic hypertension Heart disease Diabetes mellitus Thyroid disorders Hematologic/malignancy Collagen-vascular disease (SLE) Genetic history—inborn errors of metabolism, bleeding, jaundice Drug therapy

Current gestational age Method of assessing gestational age

Fetal surveillance (OCT, NST, biophysical profile) Ultrasonography (anomalies, hydrops) Amniotic fluid analysis (L/S ratio) Oligohydramnios-polyhydramnios Vaginal bleeding Preterm labor Premature (prolonged) rupture of membranes (duration) Preeclampsia Urinary tract infection Colonization status (herpes simplex, group B streptococcus) Medications/drugs Acute medical illness/exposure to infectious agents Fetal therapy

Duration of labor Presentation—vertex, breech Vaginal versus cesarean section Spontaneous labor versus augmented or induced with oxytocin (Pitocin) Forceps delivery Presence of meconium-stained fluid Maternal fever/amnionitis Fetal heart rate patterns (distress) Scalp pH Maternal analgesia, anesthesia Nuchal cord Apgar score/methods of resuscitation Gestational age assessment Growth status (AGA, LGA, SGA)

AGA, Average for gestational age; AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; LGA, large for gestational age; L/S, lecithin-to-sphingomyelin ratio; NST, nonstress test; OCT, oxytocin challenge test; SGA, small for gestational age; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus. is almost equal to the oxygen content in older infants and children because fetal blood has a much higher concentration of hemoglobin. Fetal hemoglobin (two alpha and two gamma chains) has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult hemoglobin, facilitating oxygen transfer across the placenta. The fetal hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve is shifted to the left of the adult curve (Fig. 58-1); at the same Pao2 level, fetal hemoglobin is more saturated than adult hemoglobin. Because fetal hemoglobin functions on the steep, lower end of the oxygen saturation curve (Pao2, 20 to 30 mm Hg), however, oxygen unloading to the tissue is not deficient. In contrast, at the higher oxygen concentrations present in the placenta, oxygen loading is enhanced.
If unsure: Ultrasound-guided transabdominal instillation of indigo carmine dye to check for leakage (unequivocal test). Minimize infection risk; do not perform digital vaginal exams on women who are not in labor or for whom labor is not planned immediately. Check fetal heart tracing, maternal temperature, WBC count, and uterine tenderness for evidence of chorioamnionitis. Depends on GA and fetal lung maturity. Term: First check GBS status and fetal presentation; then labor may be induced or the patient can be observed for 24–72 hours. > 34–36 weeks’ gestation: Labor induction may be considered. < 32 weeks’ gestation: Expectant management with bed rest and pelvic rest. Antibiotics: Given to prevent infection and to prolong the latency period in the absence of infection. Antenatal corticosteroids (e.g., betamethasone or dexamethasone × 48 hours): Can be given to promote fetal lung maturity in the absence of intra-amniotic infection prior to 32 weeks’ GA. If signs of infection or fetal distress develop, give antibiotics (ampicillin and gentamicin) and induce labor. Preterm labor and delivery, chorioamnionitis, placental abruption, cord prolapse. Defned as onset of labor between 20 and 37 weeks’ gestation. Occurs in > 10% of all U.S. pregnancies and is the 1° cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Risk factors include multiple gestation, infection, PROM, uterine anomalies, previous preterm labor or delivery, polyhydramnios, placental abruption, poor maternal nutrition, and low SES. Most patients have no identifiable risk factors.
Both techniques involve the use of antibodies. C. ELISA requires the use of electrophoresis. D. Western blots require use of the polymerase chain reaction. Q3. Why are eukaryotic cells unaffected by antibiotics in the tetracycline class? Case 3: Blood on the Toothbrush

Patient Presentation: LT is an 84-year-old man whose gums have been bleeding for several months. Focused History: LT is a widower and lives alone in a suburban community on the East Coast. He no longer drives. His two children live on the West Coast and come east infrequently. Since the death of his wife 11 months ago, he has been isolated and finds it hard to get out of the house. His appetite has changed, and he is content with cereal, coffee, and packaged snacks. Chewing is difficult. Pertinent Findings: The physical examination was remarkable for the presence of swollen dark-colored gums (see image at right). Several of LT’s teeth were loose, including one that anchors his dental bridge. Several black and blue marks (ecchymoses) were noted on the legs, and an unhealed sore was present on the right wrist.
A complete physical examination and developmental screening should assess signs of inflicted injury; oral or dental problems; indicators of pulmonary, cardiac, or gastrointestinal

Cystic fibrosis and other causes of pancreatic insufficiency Celiac disease Other malabsorption syndromes Gastrointestinal reflux

Chromosomal abnormalities, genetic syndromes Congenital heart disease Gastrointestinal abnormalities (e.g., pyloric stenosis, malrotation) Vascular rings Upper airway obstruction Dental caries Congenital immunodeficiency syndromes

Human immunodeficiency virus Tuberculosis Hepatitis Urinary tract infection, chronic sinusitis, parasitic infection

Thyroid disease Adrenal or pituitary disease Aminoaciduria, organic aciduria Galactosemia

Celiac disease Food intolerance Child neglect Delayed introduction of age-appropriate foods Juice consumption disease; and dysmorphic features that may suggest a genetic or teratogenic cause for growth failure. A complete neurologic examination may reveal spasticity or hypotonia, which can have untoward effects on feeding and growth. Physical findings related to malnutrition include decreased subcutaneous fat, decreased muscle mass, dermatitis, hepatomegaly, cheilosis, or edema (see Chapter 30). Additionally children with FTT have more otitis media, respiratory, and gastrointestinal infections than age-matched controls; severely malnourished children are at risk for a variety of serious infections. The history and physical examination findings should guidethe laboratory evaluation. Simple screening tests are recommended to identify common illnesses that cause growth failureand to search for medical problems resulting from malnutrition. Initial tests may include a complete blood count; screening for iron deficiency anemia and lead toxicity; urinalysis,urine culture, and serum electrolytes to assess renal infection ordysfunction; thyroid stimulating hormone; liver function tests;and a protein purified derivative test to screen for tuberculosis.Human immunodeficiency virus testing may also be indicated.For children with diarrhea, abdominal pain, or malodorousstools, a stool sample for culture and ova and parasites may be indicated. A review of the child’s newborn screen may also bewarranted. Observation during feeding and home visitation, ifpossible, is of great diagnostic value in assessing feeding problems, food preferences, mealtime distractions, unusual or disruptive parent-child interactions, and the home environment. Treatment must address the child’s nutritional requirementsand the social issues of the family. Initial treatment should focuson the nutritional and medical management of the child whileengaging the family in the treatment plan. Parents of malnourished children may feel personally responsible and threatenedby the diagnosis of FTT. Parents may be so depressed or dysfunctional they cannot focus on their child’s needs; they maynot recognize the psychosocial and family contributors to themalnutrition. These issues can have a profound effect on thesuccess of treatment, and they need to be addressed. Children with mild malnutrition whose cause is easily identified can be managed by the primary care physician and family.
A four-month-old boy has life-threatening Pseudomonas infection. Acute-phase treatment for Kawasaki disease. Treatment for mild and severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Sudden onset of mental status changes, emesis, and liver dysfunction after taking aspirin. A child has loss of red light reﬂex. Diagnosis? Neuroblastoma. Esophageal atresia with distal TEF (85%). Unable to pass NG tube. Mild illness and/or low-grade fever, current antibiotic therapy, and prematurity. Ophthalmologic exam, CT, and MRI. CF or Hirschsprung’s disease. Duodenal atresia. Correct metabolic abnormalities. Then correct pyloric stenosis with pyloromyotomy.
For Questions 28.1–28.5, match the vitamin deficiency to the clinical consequence. 8.1. Bleeding 8.2. Diarrhea and dermatitis 8.3. Neural tube defects 8.4. Night blindness (nyctalopia) 8.5. Sore, spongy gums and loose teeth

Correct answers = H, B, A, C, E. Vitamin K is required for formation of the γcarboxyglutamate residues in several proteins required for blood clotting. Consequently, a deficiency of vitamin K results in a tendency to bleed. Niacin deficiency is characterized by the three Ds: diarrhea, dermatitis, and dementia (and death, a fourth D, if untreated). Folic acid deficiency can result in neural tube defects in the developing fetus. Night blindness is one of the first signs of vitamin A deficiency. Rod cells in the retina detect white and black images and work best in low light, for example, at night. Rhodopsin, the visual pigment of the rod cells, consists of 11-cis retinal bound to the protein opsin. Vitamin C is required for the hydroxylation of proline and lysine during collagen synthesis. Severe vitamin C deficiency (scurvy) results in defective connective tissue, characterized by sore and spongy gums, loose teeth, capillary fragility, anemia, and fatigue.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
The diagnosis was made at the age of 15 months, at which time he had developmental delay, hepatomegaly, and skeletal involvement. At the time of the picture, the patient had short stature, an enlarged tongue, persistent nasal discharge, stiff joints, and hydrocephalus. Verbal language skills consisted of four or five words. The patient had a severe hearing loss and wore hearing aids. (Source: CR Scriver et al [eds]: The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease online, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, www.ommbid .com.) See Chap. 432e. Figure 436e-18 Growth and development of two patients with type Ia glycogen storage disease. A. Patient at age 7 years and at age 39 years. B. Another patient at age 10 years and at age 33 years. Both patients survive despite inadequate treatment of their disease. Note that the abdomen is less protuberant with age.
He appeared normal at birth. On his growth charts, he has been at the 30th percentile for both weight and length since birth. His immunizations are up to date. JS last ate a few hours ago. Physical Examination (Pertinent Findings): JS appears sleepy and feels clammy to the touch. His respiratory rate is elevated. His temperature is normal. JS has a protuberant, firm abdomen that appears to be nontender. His liver is palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and is smooth. His kidneys are enlarged and symmetrical. Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low. JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended.
Kwashiorkor (protein malnutrition). Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (purine salvage problem with HGPRTase deficiency). Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). First-line pharmacotherapy for depression. Antidepressants associated with hypertensive crisis. Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual dysfunction, and ↓ libido. A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found. Name the defense mechanism:

A mother who is angry at her husband yells at her child. A pedophile enters a monastery. A woman calmly describes a grisly murder. A hospitalized 10-year-old begins to wet his bed. Life-threatening muscle rigidity, fever, and rhabdomyolysis. Amenorrhea, bradycardia, and abnormal body image in a young female. SSRIs.
Maintaining normoglycemia may have a positive impact on outcomes. Other supportive measures include controlling agitation, fever, and seizures. All treatments for increased ICP are temporary measuresintended to prevent herniation until the underlying disease process either is treated or resolves spontaneously. Timely interventioncan reverse cerebral herniation. Complete neurologic recovery ispossible, but rare, after signs of transtentorial or foramen magnumherniation have begun. When these signs are complete, however,with bilaterally dilated, unreactive pupils, absent eye movements,and flaccid quadriplegia, recovery is no longer possible. Children typically acquire developmental milestones in a variable but predictable sequence (Chapter 7). Rarely, children present with stagnation of development or frank loss of previouslyacquired skills. These neurodegenerative disorders encompassa large heterogenous group of diseases that result from specificgenetic and biochemical defects and varied unknown causes.Neurodegenerative disorders can present at any age. Clinical phenotypes also vary, but neurologic deterioration may bedemonstrated as loss of speech, vision, hearing, and intellectualor motor abilities—sometimes in concert with seizures, feedingdifficulties, and mental retardation. Progression may be slowover many years, or may lead to death in early childhood. Degenerative diseases may affect gray matter (neuronal degenerative disorders), white matter (leukodystrophies),both gray and white matter, or specific, focal regions of the brain. Early seizures and intellectual impairment mark grey matter disorders, whereas upper motor neuron signs and progressive spasticity are the hallmarks of white matter disorders. Many neurodegenerative illnesses result from enzymatic disorders within subcellular organelles, including lysosomes, mitochondria, and peroxisomes (Table 185-1). Therefore, any

Cognitive regression, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, seizures Test: acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) enzyme activity

Hepatosplenomegaly, cytopenia, spasticity, hyperextension, extraocular palsies, trismus, difficulty swallowing

Test: glucosylceramidase enzyme activity

Infantile form—early feeding difficulties, global retardation, seizures, coarse facial features, hepatosplenomegaly, cherry red spot

Juvenile form—incoordination, weakness, language regression; later, seizures, spasticity, blindness

Test: GM1 ganglioside enzyme activity; GLB1 gene testing

Tay-Sachs—progressive weakness, marked startle reaction, blindness, convulsions, spasticity, and cherry red spots

Test: β-hexosaminidase A (HEX A) enzymatic activity Sandhoff disease—phenotype similar to Tay-Sachs

Test: hexosaminidase A and B enzyme activity (both deficient)

Irritability, hyperpyrexia, vomiting, seizures, hypertonia, blindness Test: galactocerebrosidase (GALC) enzyme activity

Late infantile form—stiffening and ataxia of gait, spasticity, optic atrophy, intellectual deterioration, absent reflexes Juvenile and adult forms

Test: 1. arylsulfatase A (ARSA) enzyme activity 2.
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
1.4). At the completion of the physical examination, the patient should be informed of the findings. When the results of the examination are normal, the patient can be reassured accordingly. When there is a possible abnormality, the patient should be informed immediately; this discussion should take place after the examination with the patient clothed. A plan to evaluate the findings should be outlined brieﬂy and in clear, understandable language. Figure 1.4 The rectovaginal examination. The implications and timing of any proposed procedure (e.g., biopsy) should be discussed, and the patient should be informed when the results of any tests will be available. Pediatric Patients A careful examination is indicated when a child presents with genital symptoms such as itching, discharge, burning with urination, or bleeding. The examiner should be familiar with the normal appearance of the prepubertal genitalia. The normal unestrogenized hymenal ring and vestibule can appear mildly erythematous. The technique of examination is different from that used for examining an adult and may need to be tailored to the individual child based on her age, size, and comfort with the examiner. A speculum examination should not be performed in a prepubertal child in the office. A young child usually can be examined best in a “frog leg” or “butterﬂy leg” position on the examining table. Some very young girls (toddlers or infants) do best when held in their mother’s arms. Sometimes, the mother can be positioned, clothed, on the examination table (feet in stirrups, head of table elevated) with the child on her lap, the child’s legs straddling her mother’s legs.
The review of systems should include detailed questions on overall health, fever, chills, recent weight loss, and recent illnesses. Physical examination should include a complete musculoskeletal and neurologic evaluation. Spinal alignment, range of motion, areas of tenderness, and muscle spasm should be noted. Red flags for childhood back pain include persistent or increasing pain, systemic findings (e.g., fever, weight loss), neurologic deficits, bowel or bladder dysfunction, young age (under 4 is strongly associated with tumor), night waking, pain that restricts activity, and a painful left thoracic spinal curvature. Anteroposterior and lateral standing films of the entire spine with bilateral oblique views of the affected area should be obtained. Secondary imaging with bone scan, CT scan, or MRI may be necessary for diagnosis. MRI is very useful for suspected intraspinal pathology. Laboratory studies, such as a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and specialized testing for juvenile idiopathic arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis, may be indicated. The differential diagnosis of pediatric back pain is extensive (Table 202-2). Treatment depends on the specific diagnosis. If serious pathology has been ruled out and no definitediagnosis has been established, an initial trial of physicaltherapy with close follow-up for reevaluation is recommended. Diskitis (most common before the age of 6 years) Vertebral osteomyelitis (pyogenic or tuberculous) Spinal epidural abscess Pyelonephritis Pancreatitis

Hip and pelvic abnormalities (sacroiliac joint dysfunction) Herniated nucleus pulposus (intervertebral disk) Overuse injuries (facet syndrome) Vertebral stress fractures (spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis) Vertebral compression fracture (steroid, sickle cell anemia) Upper cervical spine instability (atlantoaxial instability)

Primary vertebral tumors (osteogenic sarcoma) Metastatic tumor (neuroblastoma) Primary spinal tumor (astrocytoma) Bone marrow malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma) Benign tumors (eosinophilic granuloma, osteoid osteoma)

Spondylolysis is a defect in the pars interarticularis. Spondylolisthesis refers to bilateral defects with anterior slippageof the superior vertebra on the inferior vertebra. The lesions are not present at birth, but about 5% of children will have the lesion by 6 years of age. It is most common in adolescent athletes, especially those involved in sports that involverepetitive back extension.
The vastus medialis muscle pulls medially to keep the patella centralized. (Modified from Smith JB: Knee problems in children, Pediatr Clin North Am 33:1439, 1986.) The patellofemoral joint is the extensor mechanism of the knee and a common site of injury in the adolescent (Fig. 200-3). Knee effusion or swelling is a common sign of injury. Whenthe fluid accumulates rapidly after an injury, it is usually ahemarthrosis (blood in the joint) and may indicate a fracture,ligamentous disruption (often of the anterior cruciate ligament[ACL]), or meniscus tear. Unexplained knee effusion mayoccur with arthritis (septic, Lyme disease, viral, postinfectious,juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus).It may also occur as a result of overactivity and hypermobilejoint syndrome (ligamentous laxity). An aspiration and laboratory evaluation of unexplained effusion can help expedite adiagnosis. Each meniscus is normally semilunar in shape; rarely thelateral meniscus will be disk shaped. A normal meniscus isattached at the periphery and glides anteriorly and posteriorlywith knee motion. The discoid meniscus is less mobile and may tear more easily. When there is inadequate posterolateral attachment, the discoid meniscus can displace anteriorlywith knee flexion, causing an audible click. Most commonly,patients will present in late childhood or early adolescenceafter an injury with knee pain and swelling. The anteroposterior radiographs can show increased joint space and asquared-off appearance of the lateral femoral condyle; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can confirm the diagnosis.Treatment is usually arthroscopic excision of tears and reshaping of the meniscus. A popliteal cyst (Baker cyst) is commonly seen in themiddle childhood years.
Q1. Based on the findings, which enzyme of the urea cycle is most likely to be deficient in this patient? A. Arginase

B. Argininosuccinate lyase

C. Argininosuccinate synthetase

D. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I

E. Ornithine transcarbamoylase Q2. Why is Arg supplementation helpful in this case? Q3. In individuals with partial (milder) deficiency of urea cycle enzymes, the level of which one of the following would be expected to be decreased during periods of physiologic stress? A. Alanine

B. Ammonia

C. Glutamine

D. Insulin

E. pH

Case 10: Calf Pain

Patient Presentation: CR is a 19-year-old female who is being evaluated for pain and swelling in her right calf. Focused History: Ten days ago, CR had her spleen removed following a bicycle accident in which she fractured her tibial eminence, necessitating immobilization of the right knee. She has had a good recovery from the surgery. CR is no longer taking pain medication but has continued her oral contraceptives (OCP). Pertinent Findings: CR’s right calf is reddish in color (erythematous) and warm to the touch. It is visibly swollen. The left calf is normal in appearance and is without pain. An ultrasound is ordered. Diagnosis: CR has a deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
The child may be slow to arise in the morning and may have a limp. Children may refrain from usual activities and athletics. Enthesitis is inflammation at the insertion of a ligament to a bone. Serositis, inflammation of serosal lining such as pleuritis, pericarditis, or peritonitis, gives rise to chest pain, shortness of breath, or abdominal pain. Myositis,inflammation of the muscle, may lead to symptoms of muscle pain, weakness, or difficulty performing tasks of daily living. Vasculitis, inflammation of the blood vessels, leads to nonspecific symptoms of rash (petechiae, purpura) and edema when small vessels deep in the papillary dermis are involved; involvement of medium-sized vessels results in a circumscribed tender nodule. A thorough history and physical examination is frequently sufficient to narrow the differential diagnosis and elicit the diagnosis. The child’s overall appearance, evidence of growth failure, orfailure to thrive may point to a significant underlying inflammatory disorder. The head and neck examination may showevidence of mucosal ulceration, seen in diseases such as SLE. The eye examination may show pupillary irregularity and synechiae from uveitis or the conjunctivitis of Kawasaki disease.Diffuse lymphadenopathy may be found and is nonspecific. Therespiratory and cardiac examinations may show pericardial orpleural friction rubs, indicating serositis. Splenomegaly or hepatomegaly raises suspicion of activation of the reticuloendothelial system that occurs in systemic-onset JIA or SLE. The joint examination is crucial for the diagnosis of arthritis and may identify evidence of joint swelling, effusion, tenderness, and erythema from increased blood flow. Joint contractures may be seen. The joint lining, or synovium, may be thickened from chronic inflammation.
Patient education about the benefits of smoking cessation, clear advice to quit smoking, and physician support improve smoking cessation rates, although 95% of smokers who successfully quit do so on their own. Self-help materials are available from the National Cancer Institute, and community-based support groups and local chapters of the American Cancer Society and the American Lung Association. The combination of counseling and medication (nicotine and nonnicotine options) is more effective than either used alone, and Clinical Practice Guidelines on treating tobacco use and dependence from the

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services provide recommendations (48). The “5 As”—Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, and Arrange—are designed to be used with smokers who are willing to quit (49). The Assist component typically includes first-line pharmacotherapy with bupropion or nicotine replacement in the form of gum, inhaler, nasal spray, or patch. In addition, ongoing visits for counseling and support are essential and may include practical counseling and assistance with problem-solving skills and social support during and after treatment. Relapse prevention is important, with congratulations for any successes and encouragement to remain abstinent. Patients who use tobacco but are unwilling to quit at the time of the visit should be treated with the “5 Rs” motivational intervention: Relevance, Risks, Rewards, Roadblocks, and Repetition (48). 1. ACOG Editorial Committee for Guidelines for Women’s Health Care. Guidelines for women’s health care: a resource manual. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2007:573. 2. Coleman VH, Laube DW, Hale RW, et al.
Stages of Change in Behavioral Counseling

Precontemplation Denial or ignorance of the problem. A 51-year-old smoker has not even thought about cessation. Contemplation Ambivalence or conﬂicted emotions; assessing benefits and barriers to change. A 43-year-old crack cocaine addict considers treatment for her addiction. Preparation Experimenting with small changes; collecting information about change. A 28-year-old heroin addict visits his doctor to ask questions about quitting. Taking direct action toward achieving a goal. A 33-year-old enters a rehabilitation facility for treatment of addiction to prescription narcotics. Maintaining a new behavior; avoiding temptation. A 41-year-old continues to visit Alcoholics Anonymous meetings to gain support and reinforcement against relapse. Action Maintenance ■Live vaccines should not be administered to immunosuppressed patients. Such vaccines are also contraindicated in pregnant women owing to a theoretical risk of maternal-fetal transmission. Defned as the use of drugs to prevent disease. Examples include supplementation of water and food with healthful vitamins and minerals; aspirin prophylaxis for heart disease; statin treatment for hypercholesterolemia; and perioperative β-blockade. In offering counsel, physicians should tailor their education and suggestions to the individual patient as well as to his or her stage of change (see Table 2.4-2).
Advice from a physician to quit smoking, particularly at the time of an acute illness, is a powerful trigger for cessation attempts, with up to half of patients who are advised to quit making a cessation effort. Other triggers include the cost of cigarettes, media campaigns, and changes in rules to restrict smoking in the workplace. All patients should be asked whether they smoke, how much they smoke, how long they have smoked, their past experience with quitting, and whether they are currently interested in quitting. Intensity of smoking and smoking within 30 min of waking are useful measures of the intensity of nicotine addiction. Even those who are not interested in quitting should be encouraged and motivated to quit; provided a clear, strong, and personalized message by the clinician that smoking

Ask: Systematically identify all tobacco users at every visit Advise: Strongly urge all smokers to quit Identify smokers willing to quit Assist the patient in quitting Arrange follow-up contact

First-line therapies Nicotine gum (1.5) Nicotine patch (1.9) Nicotine nasal inhaler (2.7) Nicotine oral inhaler (2.5) Nicotine lozenge (2.0) Bupropion (2.1) Varenicline (2.7)

Second-line therapies Clonidine (2.1) Nortriptyline (3.2)

Physician or other medical personnel counseling (10 min) (1.3)

Intensive smoking cessation programs (at least 4–7 sessions of 20to 30-min duration lasting at least 2 and preferably 8 weeks) (2.3) Clinic-based smoking status identification system (3.1) Counseling by nonclinicians and social support by family and friends Telephone counseling (1.2) aNumerical value following the intervention is the multiple for cessation success compared to no intervention. 22 is an important health concern; and offered assistance if they become interested in quitting in the future. Many of those not currently expressing an interest in quitting may nevertheless make an attempt to quit in the subsequent year. For those interested in quitting, a quit date should be negotiated, usually not the day of the visit but within the next few weeks, and a follow-up contact by office staff around the time of the quit date should be provided. There is a relationship between the amount of assistance a patient is willing to accept and the success of the cessation attempt. There are a variety of nicotine-replacement products, including over-the-counter nicotine patches, gum, and lozenges, as well as nicotine nasal and oral inhalers available by prescription. These products can be used for up to 3–6 months, and some products are formulated to allow a gradual step-down in dosage with increasing duration of abstinence. Antidepressants such as bupropion (300 mg in divided doses for up to 6 months) have also been shown to be effective, as has varenicline, a partial agonist for the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (initial dose 0.5 mg daily increasing to 1 mg twice daily at day 8; treatment duration up to 6 months). Severe psychiatric symptoms, including suicidal ideation, have been reported with varenicline, resulting in a U.S. Food and Drug Administration–mandated warning and a recommendation for closer therapeutic supervision, but evidence to establish the frequency of these responses and the specificity of their association with varenicline remains unclear. Some evidence supports the combined use of nicotine-replacement therapy (NRT) and antidepressants as well as the use of gum or lozenges for acute cravings in patients using patches. Pretreatment with antidepressants or varenicline is recommended for 1–2 weeks prior to the quit date, and pretreatment with nicotine-replacement products is also being explored, as is longer duration of nicotine replacement as a maintenance therapy for those who are unsuccessful in quitting with a shorter duration of use.
Patients were eligible for the trial if they had a greater than 30 pack-year history of cigarette smoking; had smoked within the past 15 years if a former smoker; had no prior history of lung cancer; had no history of other life-threatening cancers in the prior 5 years; did not have symptoms suggestive of an undiagnosed lung cancer (such as hemoptysis or weight loss); and had not had a chest CT scan in the prior 18 months. Accrual to the study was excellent, and the primary endpoint of a 20% rela-tive reduction in mortality was achieved in 2010. An absolute risk reduction of lung cancer death of four per 1000 individuals screened by LDCT was realized. Interestingly, all-cause mortality was also reduced by nearly 7% in the LDCT group, further empha-sizing the impact of lung cancer on the mortality of smokers and former smokers.23 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  (USPSTF) now recommends annual screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed tomography screening in high risk patients. Annual screening averted 14% of lung cancer deaths when applied to a population of asymptomatic adults age 55 to 80 years who have a 30 pack-year smoking history and are either currently smoking or have quit within the past 15 years. Patients should be healthy enough to tolerate curative treatment, specifically surgery per guidelines, and screening should be dis-continued once the patient has not smoked for 15 years or develops a life-limiting health condition, becomes unable to tolerate lung surgery or is unwilling to undergo curative lung resection. Require-ments for coverage differ between Medicare and private insurers, with private insurers following the USPSTF guidelines, while Medicare uses age 55 to 77 years with the same smoking history but does not define comorbid conditions. Use of standardized reporting with criteria for lung nodule identification and classifica-tion is required by the Center for Medicaid & Medicare Services (CMS) but is only recommended by private insurers. Shared deci-sion-making is also required by Medicare, but it is only recom-mended by private insurers. Medicare also differs from private 4Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67501/03/19   7:00 PM 676SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-4Summary of selected studies of risk factors for lung cancer in individuals who never smokedRISK FACTORRISK ESTIMATE (95% CI)COMMENTSREFERENCEEnvironmental tobacco smoke1.19 (90% CI: 1.04–1.35)Meta-analysis of 11 U.S. studies of spousal exposure (females only)2251.21 (1.13–1.30)Meta-analysis of 44 case-control studies worldwide of spousal exposure2261.22 (1.13–1.33)Meta-analysis of 25 studies worldwide of workplace exposure2261.24 (1.18–1.29)Meta-analysis of 22 studies worldwide of workplace exposure227Residential radon8.4% (3.0%–15.8%) per 100 Bq m3 increase in measured radonMeta-analysis of 13 European studies22811% (0%–28%) per 100 Bq m3Meta-analysis of 7 North American studies229Cooking oil vapors2.12 (1.81–2.47)Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and Taiwan (females who never smoked)230Indoor coal and wood burning2.66 (1.39–5.07)Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and Taiwan (both sexes)2301.22 (1.04–1.44)Large case-control study (2861 cases and 3118 controls) from Eastern and Central Europe (both sexes)2312.5 (1.5–3.6)Large case-control study (1205 cases and 1541 controls) from Canada (significant for women only)232Genetic factors: family history, CYP1A1 Ile462Val polymorphism, XRCC1 variants1.51 (1.11–2.06)Meta-analysis of 28 case-control, 17 cohort, and 7 twin studies2332.99 (1.51–5.91)Meta-analysis of 14 case-control studies of Caucasian never smokers2342.04 (1.17–3.54)Meta-analysis of 21 case-control studies of Caucasian and Asian never smokers (significant for Caucasians only)235No associationMeta-analysis of 13 case-control studies236No association overall; reduced risk 0.65 (0.46–0.83) with Arg194Trp polymorphism and 0.56 (0.36–0.86) with Arg280His for heavy smokersLarge case-control study from Europe (2188 cases and 2198 controls)237Increased risk for never smokers 1.3 (1.0–1.8) and decreased risk for heavy smokers 0.5 (0.3–1.0) with Arg299GlnLarge case-control study from the  United States (1091 cases and  1240 controls)238Viral factors: HPV 16 and 1810.12 (3.88–26.4) for never smoking women >60 yCase-control study (141 cases, 60 controls) from Taiwan of never smoking women239Abbreviations: Bq = becquerels; CI = confidence interval; CYP1A1 = cytochrome P450 enzyme 1A1; HPV = human papilloma virus.Reproduced with permission from Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF: Lung cancer in never smokers—a different disease, Nat Rev Cancer. 2007 Oct; 7(10):778-790.insurers in that it requires accreditation of the imaging center and submission of all low-dose CT data to a CMS-approved national registry, among other specifications. With this approach, it is expected that 50% of diagnosed cancers will be early stage. Screening of patients age 50 years or older with a 20 pack-year or greater history and additional risk factors (as determined by the Tammemagi lung cancer risk calculator or other validated risk scores) that increase the risk of lung cancer to 1.3% or greater should also be considered as part of lung cancer screening pro-grams. In all cases, patient–physician shared decision-making should be undertaken, with a discussion of the risks and benefits of screening. It is important to note that there was a 7% false-positive rate in NLST trial, which can lead to patient anxiety, invasive testing, and potentially morbid procedures to further evaluate the finding.
Phases and components of an enhanced recovery after surgery pathway. VTE = venous thromboembolism; PONV = postopera-tive nausea and vomiting.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211501/03/19   9:39 AM 2116SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdata from patients undergoing elective rectal cancer surgery within an ERAS program have shown the feasibility of provid-ing a cardiopulmonary exercise interval training program that is delivered three times per week for 6 weeks in a hospital setting after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and before surgery.40 The interval following neoadjuvant therapy offers a unique window of time to improve the fitness and nutrition of many oncologic patients, which is especially important as these patients can often be some of the most debilitated.The addition of physical fitness and activity to a preopera-tive regimen for elderly patients undergoing major abdominal surgery significantly improved mortality, discharge to home versus a care facility, and length of stay.41 While this study showed that patients benefited from 60-minute sessions 2 to  4 weeks prior to surgery, even brief therapy before surgery, ranging from 1 day to 7 days before major abdominal surgery, have been associate with a significant decrease in postopera-tive complications.42,43 Therefore, some oncologic or semiurgent patients may actually benefit from preoperative cardiopulmo-nary exercise programs.Smoking Cessation. Clearly tobacco use, especially smok-ing, has been well documented across all surgical specialties to increase postoperative mortality, as well as increase postopera-tive complications including prolonged ventilation, pneumonia, deep venous thrombosis, wound infection, delayed wound heal-ing, and reduced bone fusion.44-47 Physiologically, the carbon monoxide and nicotine from tobacco products increase heart rate and blood pressure and the body’s demand for oxygen. Nic-otine also causes vasoconstriction, reducing perfusion to many tissue beds. Obviously, it is advantageous for patients to cease smoking preoperatively. There is debate about the duration of the nicotine free days needed preoperatively to offer best out-comes, though the literature suggests that the longer duration of smoking cessation prior to surgery portends better outcomes.48 This is likely to allow for bronchiolar and collagen remodeling and the several weeks following last exposure that are needed to achieve blood free of nicotine and its derivatives.Metabolic Stress Response to SurgeryMultiple organ systems interact in numerous metabolic and inflammatory cascades following the stress response to surgery leading to insulin resistance and protein catabolism (Fig. 50-3). Neuroendocrine responses, stress hormones cascades, activation of cytokine, and immune reactions all occur, leading to a cata-bolic state.49 Central to this metabolic and inflammatory cas-cade is the development of insulin resistance, whereby a normal insulin concentration results in a subnormal biologic response. As insulin is the main anabolic hormone involved in glucose control, fat metabolism, and protein balance, insulin resistance disrupts many metabolic pathways.Hyperglycemia from insulin resistance results from an increase in glucose production and a decrease in glucose uptake by the periphery. In a fed state, insulin levels surge to 6 to  8 times basal levels, which stops glucose production and increases peripheral glucose uptake threeto fourfold.50 When fasting, insulin levels remain in a relative steady state with minimal effects on glucose and protein metabolism. Even when insulin levels increase to three times basal levels, there is no increase in peripheral glucose uptake. Therefore, in the postoperative fast-ing state, without the assistance of exogenous insulin, peripheral Counterregulatory hormonescytokinesGlycogenolysisGlucoseLipolysisInsulinresistanceWhole-bodyprotein catabolismGluconeogenesisHypothalamusPituitaryGlycerolAmino acidsAcute-phaseproteinsHyperglycemiaPyruvateGlycolysisProteolysisLactateInjury siteAfferentsensorynervesSympathetic nervesHumoral agentsNeural impulsesFigure 50-3. Metabolic stress response to surgery results in insulin resistance. (Reproduced with permission from McGill University Health Center Patient Education Office, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. )Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211601/03/19   9:39 AM 2117OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50glucose uptake is reduced.
HISTORY Presenting symptoms are frequently nonspecific. Detailed questions should be asked about the onset and duration of symptoms and about changes in severity or rate of progression over time. Host factors and comorbid conditions may increase the risk of infection with certain organisms or of a more fulminant course than is usually seen. Lack of splenic function, alcoholism with significant liver disease, IV drug use, HIV infection, diabetes, malignancy, organ transplantation, and chemotherapy all predispose to specific infections and frequently to increased severity. The patient should be questioned about factors that might help identify a nidus for invasive infection, such as recent upper respiratory tract infections, influenza, or varicella; prior trauma; disruption of cutaneous barriers due to lacerations, burns, surgery, body piercing, or decubiti; and the presence of foreign bodies, such as nasal packing after rhinoplasty, tampons, or prosthetic joints. Travel, contact with pets or other animals, or activities that might result in tick or mosquito exposure can lead to diagnoses that would not otherwise be considered. Recent dietary intake, medication use, social or occupational contact with ill individuals, vaccination history, recent sexual contacts, and menstrual history may be relevant. A review of systems should focus on any neurologic signs or sensorium alterations, rashes or skin lesions, and focal pain or tenderness and should also include a general review of respiratory, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary symptoms. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION A complete physical examination should be performed, with special attention to several areas that are sometimes given short shrift in routine examinations. Assessment of the patient’s general appearance and vital signs, skin and soft tissue examination, and the neurologic evaluation are of particular importance. The patient may appear either anxious and agitated or lethargic and apathetic. Fever is usually present, although elderly patients and compromised hosts (e.g., patients who are uremic or cirrhotic and those who are taking glucocorticoids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) may be afebrile despite serious underlying infection. Measurement of blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate helps determine the degree of hemodynamic and metabolic compromise. The patient’s airway must be evaluated to rule out the risk of obstruction from an invasive oropharyngeal infection. The etiologic diagnosis may become evident in the context of a thorough skin examination (Chap.
C. in prokaryotes is accomplished by a single DNA polymerase. D. is initiated at random sites in the genome. E. produces a polymer of deoxyribonucleoside monophosphates linked by 5′→3′-phosphodiester bonds. . What is the difference between DNA proofreading and repair? Case 6: Dark Urine and Yellow Sclerae

Patient Presentation: JF is a 13-year-old boy who presents with fatigue and yellow sclerae. Focused History: JF began treatment ~4 days ago with a sulfonamide antibiotic and a urinary analgesic for a urinary tract infection. He had been told that his urine would change color (become reddish) with the analgesic, but he reports that it has gotten darker (more brownish) over the last 2 days. Last night, his mother noticed that his eyes had a yellow tint. JF says he feels as though he has no energy. Pertinent Findings: The physical examination was remarkable for JF’s pale appearance, mild scleral icterus (jaundice), mild splenomegaly, and increased heart rate (tachycardia). JF’s urine tested positive for hemoglobin (hemoglobinuria). A peripheral blood smear reveals a lower-than-normal number of red blood cells (RBC), with some containing precipitated hemoglobin (Heinz bodies; see image at right), and a higher-than-normal number of reticulocytes (immature RBC). Results of the complete blood count (CBC) and blood chemistry tests are pending. Diagnosis: JF has glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, an X-linked disorder that causes hemolysis (RBC lysis).
On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15). * In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20). *Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses. Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds called xenobiotics—substances absorbed across the lungs or skin or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiotics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some extent to endogenous compounds. WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION NECESSARY? The mammalian drug biotransformation systems are thought to have first evolved from the need to detoxify and eliminate plant and bacterial bioproducts and toxins, which later extended to drugs and other environmental xenobiotics. Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecular volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties.
Medical and surgical treatment of the colonic disease does not impact symptoms.51Erythema nodosum is seen in 5% to 15% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease and usually coincides with clini-cal disease activity. Women are affected three to four times more frequently than men. The characteristic lesions are raised, red, and predominantly on the lower legs. Pyoderma gangreno-sum is an uncommon but serious condition that occurs almost exclusively in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. The lesion begins as an erythematous plaque, papule, or bleb, usu-ally located on the pretibial region of the leg and occasionally near a stoma. The lesions progress and ulcerate, leading to a painful, necrotic wound. Pyoderma gangrenosum may respond to resection of the affected bowel in some patients. In others, this disorder is unaffected by treatment of the underlying bowel disease. One of the challenges in managing pyoderma is that this manifestation of IBD exhibits pathergy, where the disease will manifest and have its severity exacerbated by the creation of surgical-sites. Depending on the circumstances, a history or the presence of pyoderma should prompt consideration for avoid-ance of a stoma.51Up to 10% of patients with inflammatory bowel dis-ease will develop ocular lesions. These include uveitis, iritis, episcleritis, and conjunctivitis, as well as macular degenerative, hyperpigmented pigmented epithelium (CHRPE). They usu-ally develop during an acute exacerbation of the inflammatory bowel disease. The etiology is unknown.51Principles of Nonoperative Management. Medical therapy for inflammatory bowel disease focuses on decreasing inflam-mation and alleviating symptoms, and many of the agents used are the same for both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. In general, mild to moderate flares may be treated in the outpatient setting.
Occurs frequently in those <30 years old; outbreaks in military recruits, prisons, colleges. X-ray looks worse than patient. High titer of cold agglutinins (IgM), which can agglutinate RBCs. Treatment: macrolides, doxycycline, or fluoroquinolone (penicillin ineffective since Mycoplasma has no cell wall). Not seen on Gram stain. Pleomorphic

A . Bacterial membrane contains sterols for stability. Grown on Eaton agar. Mycoplasma gets cold without a coat (no cell wall). Can cause atypical variant of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, typically in children and adolescents. Mississippi and Ohio Macrophage filled River Valleys with Histoplasma (smaller than RBC)

Eastern and Central Broad-based budding US, Great Lakes of Blastomyces (same size as RBC)

Southwestern US, Spherule (much larger California than RBC) filled with endospores of Coccidioides

Latin America Budding yeast of Paracoccidioides with “captain’s wheel” formation (much larger than RBC)

Palatal/tongue ulcers, splenomegaly, pancytopenia

Disseminates to bone/ skin (may mimic SCC)

Disseminates to skin/ bone

Similar to blastomycosis, males > females Histo hides (within macrophages)

Associated with bird or bat droppings (eg, spelunking)

Associated with dust exposure in endemic areas (eg, archeological excavations, earthquakes)

Paracoccidio parasails with the captain’s wheel all the way to Latin America alba = white. Dimorphic; forms pseudohyphae and budding yeasts at 20°C A , germ tubes at 37°C B . Systemic or superficial fungal infection. Causes oral C and esophageal thrush in immunocompromised (neonates, steroids, diabetes, AIDS), vulvovaginitis (diabetes, use of antibiotics), diaper rash, endocarditis (IV drug users), disseminated candidiasis (especially in neutropenic patients), chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Treatment: oral fluconazole/topical azoles for vaginal; nystatin, azoles, or, rarely, echinocandins for oral; fluconazole, echinocandins, or amphotericin B for esophageal or systemic disease.
Motor and sensory neuropathy lead to abnormal foot muscle mechanics and to structural changes in the foot (hammer toe, claw toe deformity, prominent metatarsal heads, Charcot joint). Autonomic neuropathy results in anhidrosis and altered superficial blood flow in the foot, which promote drying of the skin and fissure formation. PAD and poor wound healing impede resolution of minor breaks in the skin, allowing them to enlarge and to become infected. Many individuals with type 2 DM develop a foot ulcer (great toe or metatarsophalangeal areas are most common), and a significant subset who develop an ulceration will ultimately undergo amputation (14–24% risk with that ulcer or subsequent ulceration). Risk factors for foot ulcers or amputation include male sex, diabetes for >10 years, peripheral neuropathy, abnormal structure of foot (bony abnormalities, callus, thickened nails), PAD, smoking, history of previous ulcer or amputation, visual impairment, and poor glycemic control. Large calluses are often precursors to or overlie ulcerations. The optimal therapy for foot ulcers and amputations is prevention through identification of high-risk patients, education of the patient, and institution of measures to prevent ulceration. High-risk patients should be identified during the routine, annual foot examination performed on all patients with DM (see “Ongoing Aspects of Comprehensive Diabetes Care” in Chap. 418). If the monofilament test or one of the other tests is abnormal, the patient is diagnosed with loss of protective sensation (LOPS; Chap. 417). Providers should consider screening for asymptomatic PAD in individuals >50 years of age who have diabetes and other risk factors using anklebrachial index testing in high-risk individuals (Chap. 302). Patient education should emphasize (1) careful selection of footwear, (2) daily inspection of the feet to detect early signs of poor-fitting footwear or minor trauma, (3) daily foot hygiene to keep the skin clean and moist, (4) avoidance of self-treatment of foot abnormalities and high-risk behavior (e.g., walking barefoot), and (5) prompt consultation with a health care provider if an abnormality arises. Patients at high risk for ulceration or amputation may benefit from evaluation by a foot care specialist.
This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option. Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated? Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis (Figure 42–1).
The nerve conduction studies indicated that the compression site was at the elbow joint. The clinical findings are not consistent with carpal tunnel syndrome. The clinician should have been alerted to this problem given that the patient experienced numbness over the thenar eminence of the hand. This clue indicates an understanding of the anatomy. Compression of the nerve within the carpal tunnel does not produce this numbness, because the small cutaneous branch that supplies this region is proximal to the flexor retinaculum. The nerve compromise was caused by the ligament of Struthers, which is an embryological remnant of the coracobrachialis muscle. It is an extremely rare finding. Occasionally it may ossify and cross the nerve, artery, and vein to produce compression in arm extension. Although this is very rare and unusual, it illustrates the complex course of the median nerve. After a hard day’s studying, two medical students decided to meet for coffee. The more senior student said to the freshman that he would bet him $50 that he could not lift a matchbook with a finger. The freshman placed $50 on the table and the bet was on. The senior medical student told the freshman to make a fist and place it in a palm-downward position, so that the middle phalanges of the fingers were in direct contact with the bar counter. He was then told to extend his middle finger so that it stuck forward while maintaining the middle phalanges of the index finger, the ring finger, and the little finger on the bar surface. A matchbook was placed on top of the freshman’s middle fingernail and he was told to flip it.
A detailed history is very diagnostic but the use of a couple simple tests can help to confirm it (63). The most common one is the Phalen maneuver, in which the patient ﬂexes her palms at the wrist as close to 90 degrees as possible. Then with the dorsal portion of the hands touching and the arms parallel to the ﬂoor, the patient presses the ﬂexed hands against each other for approximately 1 minute. This should reproduce her symptoms along the median nerve. The Tinel test involves percussion over the top of the carpal tunnel where the median nerve travels. A positive test is when the percussion reproduces the pain and paresthesia. Additional testing such as nerve conduction studies should be reserved for patients who do not respond to conservative management or have significant muscle weakness. Treatment involves lifestyle modification to decrease repetitive motion injuries or prolonged marked ﬂexion at the wrist. A carpal tunnel brace can be very helpful in maintaining adequate extension at the wrist, thereby “opening” the tunnel and reducing compression on the medial nerve. Only if these strategies do not work is a surgical intervention indicated. Mitral Valve Prolapse Syndrome, Dysautonomia, and Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome

The terms mitral valve prolapse syndrome (MVPS), dysautonomia, and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) all refer to a syndrome in which the patient has problems with palpitations, hypotension, syncope, dyspnea, panic/anxiety disorder, numbness, hyperﬂexible joints, pectus excavatum, and gastric emptying disorders. Initially patients (typically fivefold times more likely to be women) who presented with these symptoms were thought to be somatizing their anxiety disorder. It is now accepted that it is a syndrome that appears to involve the autonomic nervous system (64). This often will present first in early adolescence with gradual worsening of the symptoms. The patients are very slender in build and lose weight to a low body mass index over a number of months as the syndrome evolves.
Multiple factors can contribute to decreased mobility, including complex injuries of soft tissue and bone, noncompliance of the patient with postoperative therapy, and inappropriate splinting. The surgeon performing the initial eval-uation can greatly impact this last factor. The goal of splinting is to keep the collateral ligaments on tension (MPs at 90°, IP joints straight). For severe cases of stiffness, mobilization sur-geries such as tenolysis and capsulotomies can be performed, but these rarely produce normal range of motion.40 Prevention of joint contractures with appropriate splinting and early, pro-tected mobilization is the best option to maximize mobility at the end of healing. Healing of an injured or diseased structure in the hand is not the endpoint of treatment; the goal of any inter-vention must be to obtain structure healing, relief of pain, and maximization of function.NeuromaAny lacerated nerve will form a neuroma. A neuroma consists of a ball of scar and axon sprouts at the end of the injured nerve.41 In unfavorable circumstances, this neuroma can become painful. The SRN is particularly notorious for this problem. By provid-ing proximal axon sprouts a target, nerve repair is an excellent preventive technique. In some circumstances, such as injuries requiring amputation, this is not possible. As mentioned earlier, the surgeon should resect the nerve stump as far proximally in the wound as possible to avoid the nerve stump healing in the cutaneous scar to minimize this risk.For the patient who develops a painful neuroma, nonsurgi-cal treatments are initiated first. The neuroma can be identified by the presence of a Tinel’s sign. Therapy techniques of desen-sitization, ultrasound, and electrical stimulation have all proven useful. Corticosteroid injection to the neuroma has also proven useful in some hands.When these techniques fail, surgery is contemplated. The neuroma can be resected, but a new one will form to replace it. The nerve ending can be buried in muscle or even bone to pre-vent the neuroma from residing in a superficial location where it may be impacted frequently.Regional Pain SyndromesInjuries to the upper extremity can occasionally result in the patient experiencing pain beyond the area of initial injury.
Accurate characterization of cardiac murmurs provides important insight into the natural history of many valvular and congenital heart lesions. Finally, the important role played by the physical examination in enhancing the clinician-patient relationship cannot be overestimated. THE GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Any examination begins with an assessment of the general appear-ance of the patient, with notation of age, posture, demeanor, and 267 SEC Tion 2 DiAgnoSiS oF CARDiovASCulAR DiSoRDERS overall health status. Is the patient in pain or resting quietly, dyspneic or diaphoretic? Does the patient choose to avoid certain body positions to reduce or eliminate pain, as might be the case with suspected acute pericarditis? Are there clues indicating that dyspnea may have a pulmonary cause, such as a barrel chest deformity with an increased anterior-posterior diameter, tachypnea, and pursed-lip breathing? Skin pallor, cyanosis, and jaundice can be appreciated readily and provide additional clues. A chronically ill-appearing emaciated patient may suggest the presence of long-standing heart failure or another systemic disorder, such as a malignancy. Various genetic syndromes, often with cardiovascular involvement, can also be recognized easily, such as trisomy 21, Marfan’s syndrome, and Holt-Oram syndrome. Height and weight should be measured routinely, and both body mass index and body surface area should be calculated. Knowledge of the waist circumference and the waist-to-hip ratio can be used to predict long-term cardiovascular risk. Mental status, level of alertness, and mood should be assessed continuously during the interview and examination. Skin Central cyanosis occurs with significant right-to-left shunting at the level of the heart or lungs, allowing deoxygenated blood to reach the systemic circulation. Peripheral cyanosis or acrocyanosis, in contrast, is usually related to reduced extremity blood flow due to small vessel constriction, as seen in patients with severe heart failure, shock, or peripheral vascular disease; it can be aggravated by the use of β-adrenergic blockers with unopposed α-mediated constriction. Differential cyanosis refers to isolated cyanosis affecting the lower but not the upper extremities in a patient with a large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and secondary pulmonary hypertension with right-to-left to shunting at the great vessel level.
Loudest just before S2. Usually benign. Can predispose to infective endocarditis. Can be caused by myxomatous degeneration (1° or 2° to connective tissue disease such as Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome), rheumatic fever (particularly in developing countries), chordae rupture. High-pitched “blowing” early diastolic decrescendo murmur. Best heard at base (aortic root dilation) or left sternal border (valvular disease). Long diastolic murmur, hyperdynamic pulse, and head bobbing when severe and chronic. Wide pulse pressure. Causes include Bicuspid aortic valve, Endocarditis, Aortic root dilation, Rheumatic fever (BEAR). Progresses to left HF. Follows opening snap (OS; due to abrupt halt in leaflet motion in diastole, after rapid opening due to fusion at leaflet tips). Delayed rumbling mid-to-late diastolic murmur ( interval between S2 and OS correlates with  severity). LA >> LV pressure during diastole. Often a late (and highly specific) sequela of rheumatic fever. Chronic MS can result in pulmonary congestion/hypertension and LA dilation  atrial fibrillation and Ortner syndrome.
The pulmonic component of the second heart sound (P2) also is often accentuated with elevated PA pressures, and the two components of the second heart sound (S2) are closely split. The opening snap (OS) of the mitral valve is most readily audible in expiration at, or just medial to, the cardiac apex. This sound generally follows the sound of aortic valve closure (A2) by 0.05–0.12 s. The time interval between A2 and OS varies inversely with the severity of the MS. The OS is followed by a low-pitched, rumbling, diastolic murmur, heard best at the apex with the patient in the left lateral recumbent position (see Fig. 267-5); it is accentuated by mild exercise (e.g., a few rapid sit-ups) carried out just before auscultation. In general, the duration of this murmur correlates with the severity of the stenosis in patients with preserved CO. In patients with sinus rhythm, the murmur often reappears or becomes louder during atrial systole (presystolic accentuation). Soft, grade I or II/VI systolic murmurs are commonly heard at the apex or along the left sternal border in patients with pure MS and do not necessarily signify the presence of MR. Hepatomegaly, ankle edema, ascites, and pleural effusion, particularly in the right pleural cavity, may occur in patients with MS and RV failure. Associated Lesions With severe pulmonary hypertension, a pansystolic murmur produced by functional TR may be audible along the left sternal border. This murmur is usually louder during inspiration and diminishes during forced expiration (Carvallo’s sign). When the CO is markedly reduced in MS, the typical auscultatory findings, including the diastolic rumbling murmur, may not be detectable (silent MS), but they may reappear as compensation is restored. The Graham Steell murmur of PR, a high-pitched, diastolic, decrescendo blowing murmur along the left sternal border, results from dilation of the pulmonary valve ring and occurs in patients with mitral valve disease and severe pulmonary hypertension. This murmur may be indistinguishable from the more common murmur produced by aortic regurgitation (AR), although it may increase in intensity with inspiration and is accompanied by a loud and often palpable P2. LABORATORY EXAMINATION ECG In MS and sinus rhythm, the P wave usually suggests LA enlargement (see Fig. 268-8).
Pulmonary Changes In addition to the aforementioned changes in the pulmonary vascular bed, fibrous thickening of the walls of the alveoli and pulmonary capillaries occurs commonly in MS. The vital capacity, total lung capacity, maximal breathing capacity, and oxygen uptake per unit of ventilation are reduced (Chap. 306e). Pulmonary compliance falls further as pulmonary capillary pressure rises during exercise. Thrombi and Emboli Thrombi may form in the left atria, particularly within the enlarged atrial appendages of patients with MS. Systemic embolization, the incidence of which is 10–20%, occurs more frequently in patients with AF, in patients >65 years of age, and in those with a reduced CO. However, systemic embolization may be the presenting feature in otherwise asymptomatic patients with only mild MS.

(See also Chaps. 51e and 267)

Inspection and Palpation In patients with severe MS, there may be a malar flush with pinched and blue facies. In patients with sinus rhythm and severe pulmonary hypertension or associated tricuspid stenosis (TS), the jugular venous pulse reveals prominent a waves due to vigorous right atrial systole. The systemic arterial pressure is usually normal or slightly low. An RV tap along the left sternal border signifies an enlarged RV. A diastolic thrill may rarely be present at the cardiac apex, with the patient in the left lateral recumbent position. Auscultation The first heart sound (S1) is usually accentuated in the early stages of the disease and slightly delayed. The pulmonic component of the second heart sound (P2) also is often accentuated with elevated PA pressures, and the two components of the second heart sound (S2) are closely split. The opening snap (OS) of the mitral valve is most readily audible in expiration at, or just medial to, the cardiac apex.
The intensity of a heart murmur may be diminished by any process that increases the distance between the intracardiac source and the stethoscope on the chest wall, such as obesity, obstructive lung disease, and a large pericardial effusion. The intensity of a murmur also may be misleadingly soft when cardiac output is reduced significantly or when the pressure gradient between the involved cardiac structures is low. Location and Radiation Recognition of the location and radiation of the murmur helps facilitate its accurate identification (Fig. 51e-2). Adventitious sounds, such as a systolic click or diastolic snap, or abnormalities of S1 or S2 may provide additional clues. Careful attention to the characteristics of the murmur and other heart sounds

CHAPTER 51e Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

FIguRe 51e-2 Maximal intensity and radiation of six isolated systolic murmurs. HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; MR, mitral regurgitation; Pulm, pulmonary stenosis; Aortic, aortic stenosis; VSD, ventricular septal defect. (From JB Barlow: Perspectives on the Mitral Valve. Philadelphia, FA Davis, 1987, p 140.) during the respiratory cycle and the performance of simple bedside maneuvers complete the auscultatory examination. These features, along with recommendations for further testing, are discussed below in the context of specific systolic, diastolic, and continuous heart murmurs (Table 51e-1). SYSTOLIC HeART MuRMuRS early Systolic Murmurs Early systolic murmurs begin with S1 and extend for a variable period, ending well before S2. Their causes are relatively few in number. Acute, severe MR into a normal-sized, relatively noncompliant left atrium results in an early, decrescendo systolic murmur best heard at or just medial to the apical impulse. These characteristics reflect the progressive attenuation of the pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the left atrium during systole owing to the rapid rise in left atrial pressure caused by the sudden volume load into an unprepared, noncompliant chamber and contrast sharply with the auscultatory features of chronic MR. Clinical settings in which acute, severe MR occur include (1) papillary muscle rupture complicating acute myocardial infarction (MI) (Chap.
DNA sequences present in only trace amounts can be amplified to become the predominant sequence. PCR is so sensitive that DNA sequences present in an individual cell can be amplified and studied. Isolating and amplifying a specific DNA sequence by PCR is faster and less technically difficult than traditional cloning methods using recombinant DNA techniques. C. Applications

PCR has become a very common tool in research, forensics, and clinical diagnostics. 1. Comparison of a normal gene to its mutant form: PCR allows the synthesis of mutant DNA in sufficient quantities for a sequencing protocol without laborious biologic cloning of the DNA. 2. Forensic analysis of DNA samples: DNA fingerprinting by means of PCR has revolutionized the analysis of evidence from crime scenes. DNA isolated from a single human hair, a tiny spot of blood, or a sample of semen is sufficient to determine whether the sample comes from a specific individual. The DNA markers analyzed for such fingerprinting are most commonly a type of polymorphism known as short tandem repeats. These are very similar to the VNTR described previously (see p.

491) but are smaller in size. [Note: Paternity testing uses the same techniques.] 3. Detection of low-abundance nucleic acid sequences: Viruses that have a long latency period, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), are difficult to detect at the early stage of infection using conventional methods. PCR offers a rapid and sensitive method for detecting viral DNA sequences even when only a small proportion of cells harbors the virus.
4.4. A 2-week-old infant is diagnosed with a urea cycle defect. Enzymic analysis showed no activity for ornithine transcarbamoylase (OTC), an enzyme of the cycle. Molecular analysis revealed that the messenger RNA (mRNA) product of the gene for OTC was identical to that of a control. Which of the techniques listed below was most likely used to analyze mRNA? A. Dideoxy chain termination

B. Northern blot

C. Polymerase chain reaction

D. Southern blot

E. Western blot

Correct answer = B. Northern blot allows analysis of the messenger RNA present (expressed) in a particular cell or tissue. Southern blot is used for DNA analysis, whereas western blot is used for protein analysis. Dideoxy chain termination is used to sequence DNA. Polymerase chain reaction is used to generate multiple, identical copies of a DNA sequence in vitro. 4.5. For the patient above, which phase of the central dogma was most likely affected? Correct answer = Translation. The gene is present and is able to be expressed as evidenced by normal production of messenger RNA.
Detection of low-abundance nucleic acid sequences: Viruses that have a long latency period, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), are difficult to detect at the early stage of infection using conventional methods. PCR offers a rapid and sensitive method for detecting viral DNA sequences even when only a small proportion of cells harbors the virus. [Note: Quantitative PCR (qPCR), also known as real-time PCR, allows quantification of the amount (copy number) of the target nucleic acid after each cycle of amplification (that is, in real time) rather than at the end and is useful in determining viral load (the amount of virus).] 4. Prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection of cystic fibrosis: Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal-recessive genetic disease resulting from mutations in the gene for the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. The most common mutation is a three-base deletion that results in the loss of a phenylalanine residue from the CFTR protein (see p. 450). Because the mutant allele is three bases shorter than the normal allele, it is possible to distinguish them from each other by the size of the PCR products obtained by amplifying that portion of the DNA. Figure 34.22 illustrates how the results of such a PCR test can distinguish between homozygous normal, heterozygous (carriers), and homozygous mutant (affected) individuals. The simultaneous amplification of multiple regions of a target DNA using multiple primer pairs is known as multiplex PCR. It allows detection of the loss of ≥1 exons in a gene with many exons such as the gene for CFTR, which has 27 exons. VIII. GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS

The tools of biotechnology not only allow the study of gene structure, but also provide ways of analyzing the mRNA and protein products of gene expression. A. Determining messenger RNA levels mRNA levels are usually determined by the hybridization of labeled probes to either mRNA itself or to cDNA produced from mRNA. [Note: Amplification by PCR of cDNA made from mRNA by retroviral reverse transcriptase (RT) is referred to as RT-PCR.]
Only the appropriate nucleotide (that is complementary to the next nucleotide in the template) is covalently incorporated at each cluster; the unincorporated nucleotides are washed away, and a high-resolution digital camera takes an image that registers which of the four nucleotides was added to the chain at each cluster. The fuorescent label and the 3˜-OH blocking group are then removed enzymatically, washed away, and the process is repeated many times. In this way, billions of sequencing reactions are carried out simultaneously. By keeping track of the color changes occuring at each cluster, the DNA sequence represented by each spot can be read. Although each individual sequence read is relatively short (approximately 200 nucleotides), the billions that are carried out simultaneously can produce several human genomes worth of sequence in about a day. Principle behind Illumina sequencing. This reaction is carried out stepwise, on billions of DNA clusters at once. The method relies on a color digital camera that rapidly scans all the DNA clusters after each round of modifed nucleotide incorporation. The DNA sequence of each cluster is then determined by the sequence of color changes it undergoes as the elongation reaction proceeds stepwise. Each round of modifed nucleotide incorporation, image acquisition, and removal of the 3˜block and the fuorescent group takes less than an hour. Each cluster on the slide contains many copies of different, random bits of a genome; in preparing the clusters, a DNA sequence (specifed by the experimenter) is joined to each copy in every cluster, and a primer complementary to this sequence is used to begin the elongation reaction by DNA polymerase. 100 µm A slide showing individual clusters of PCR-generated DNA molecules. Each cluster carries about 1000 identical DNA molecules; the four colors are produced by incorporation of C, G, A, or T, each of which has a different color fuorophore. The image has been taken just after a fuorescent nucleotide has been incorporated into each growing DNA chain. (From Illumina Sequencing Overview, 2013.)
PPP PP 5˜DNA template A OH OH H+ pH change detected volts 1 µm voltage-sensing chip well bead coated with DNA template A DNA sequencing by the ion torrent method. Beads, each coated with a DNA molecule that has been amplifed many times, are placed in wells along with primers and DNA polymerase. As nucleotides are sequentially washed over the beads, those incorporated by the polymerase cause a pH change. In the example shown, an A is incorporated; thus, the template must have a T in this position. As the four nucleotides are sequentially washed over the beads, the sequence of the DNA on each bead can be “read” by the pattern of pH fuctuations. Billions of beads are monitored at once by a voltage-sensitive semiconductor chip placed below the array of beads. Even newer, potentially faster, methods of sequencing DNA are being developed. Some of these “third-generation” technologies bypass the DNA amplifcation steps altogether and determine the sequence of single molecules of DNA. In one technique, a DNA molecule is pushed through a tiny channel, like a thread through the eye of a needle. As the DNA molecule moves through the pore, it generates electrical currents that depend on its sequence of nucleotides; the pattern of currents can then be used to deduce the nucleotide sequence. Other methods visualize single DNA molecules using electron or atomic force microscopy; the nucleotide sequence is read from the small differences in the “appearance” of the DNA as it is scanned. Finally, another method is based on immobilizing a single DNA polymerase molecule (with a template) and measuring the “dwell” time of each of the four nucleotides, which are labeled with different removable fuorescent dyes. Nucleotides that reside longer on the polymerase (before their dye is removed) are those incorporated by the polymerase. Although the two methods we have described in detail (Illumina and ion torrent) are now used extensively, it is likely that faster and cheaper methods will continue to be developed. 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 100,000,000 10,000,000 1,000,000 100,000 10,000 1000 100 cost in dollars years Shown here are the costs of sequencing a human genome, which was $100 million in 2001 and about a thousand dollars by the end of 2014.
2. Explain how particle characteristics and properties influence their deposition and clearance. 3. Compare and contrast the major mechanisms of particle deposition. 4. Compare and contrast the mucosal and systemic immune responses. 5. Describe unique features of immunoglobulin A and why it is well suited for the mucosal environment and protection. 6. Compare and contrast adaptive and innate immune cells in the respiratory system. 7. Describe the various metabolic processes in the lung. n addition to their primary function of gas exchange, the lungs act as a primary barrier between the outside world and the inside of the body, with host defense functions. They are also active organs in the metabolism of xenobiotic and endogenous compounds. To cope with the inhalation of foreign substances, the respiratory system and, in particular, the conducting airways have developed unique structural features: the mucociliary clearance system and specialized adaptive and innate immune response mechanisms.
These suppressive mechanisms might also explain a phenomenon called original antigenic sin. This term was coined to describe the tendency of people to make antibodies only against the epitopes expressed on the first influenza virus variant to which they are exposed, even in subsequent infections with viral variants that have additional, highly immunogenic epitopes (Fig. 11.34). Antibodies against the original virus will tend to suppress responses of naive B cells specific for the new epitopes. This might benefit the host by using only those B cells that can respond most rapidly and effectively to the virus. This pattern is broken only if the person is exposed to an influenza virus that lacks all epitopes seen in the original infection, because now no preexisting antibodies bind the virus, and naive B cells are able to respond. A similar suppression of naive T-cell responses by antigen-specific memory T cells can occur in the setting of infection by lymphocytic choriomeningitis 1000 100 10 A B C D E F G Response to epitope Response to epitope Response to epitope A B C D E F A B C D Percentagenormal response 1000 100 10 Percentagenormal response 1000 100 10 Percentagenormal response Same individual at 20 years infected with a new variant in˜uenza virus makes antibody only against epitopes shared with original virus, not against epitopes shared with the variant encountered at age 5 years Same individual at 5 years infected with a variant in˜uenza virus makes antibody only against the epitopes shared with the original virus Individual at 2 years infected with in˜uenza virus makes antibody against all epitopes present on the virus

Fig. 11.34 When individuals who have been infected with one influenza virus responds preferentially to those epitopes shared variant of influenza virus are infected with a second or third with the original virus, and makes a smaller than normal response variant, they make antibodies only against epitopes that were to new epitopes on the virus (center panel). Even at age 20 years, present on the initial virus. A child infected for the first time with this commitment to respond to epitopes shared with the original an influenza virus at 2 years of age makes a response to all epitopes virus, and the subnormal response to new epitopes, is retained (right (left panel). At age 5 years, the same child exposed to a different panel). This phenomenon is called ‘original antigenic sin.’ virus (LCMV) in the mouse or dengue virus in humans. Mice that were primed with one strain of LCMV responded to a subsequent infection with a second strain of LCMV by expanding CD8 T cells that reacted to antigens specific for the first strain. However, this type of effect was not observed when responses to variable ovalbumin antigenic epitopes were examined in the setting of recurrent infections using the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, suggesting that the suppression caused by ‘original antigenic sin’ does not occur in all immune responses. Summary.
The mechanisms of innate immunity that operate in the first two phases of the immune response are described in Chapters 2 and 3, and thymus-independent (T-independent) B-cell responses are covered in Chapter 10. The early phases contribute to the initiation of adaptive immunity, and they influence the functional character of the antigen-specific effector T cells and antibodies that appear on the scene in the late phase of the response. There are striking similarities in the effector mechanisms at each phase of the response; the main change is in the recognition structure used. An effective adaptive immune response leads to a state of protective immunity. This state consists of the presence of effector cells and molecules produced in the initial response, and of immunological memory. Immunological memory is manifested as a heightened ability to respond to pathogens that have previously been encountered and successfully eliminated. Memory T and B lymphocytes have the property of being able to transfer immune memory to naive recipients. The mechanisms that maintain immunological memory include certain cytokines, such as IL-7 and IL-15, as well as homeostatic interactions between the T-cell receptors on memory cells with self peptide:self MHC complexes. The artificial induction of protective immunity, which includes immunological memory, by vaccination is the most outstanding accomplishment of immunology in the field of medicine. The understanding of how this is accomplished is now catching up with its practical success. However, as we will see in Chapter 13, many pathogens do not induce protective immunity that completely eliminates the pathogen, so we will need to learn what prevents this before we can prepare effective vaccines against these pathogens. Questions. 11.1 True or False: The immune response is a dynamic process that initiates with an antigen-independent response, which becomes more focused and powerful as it develops antigen specificity. Once the adaptive immune system develops, a single type of response is capable of eliminating any type of pathogen. 11.2 Multiple Choice: Which statement is incorrect?
Mak, T.W., and Saunders, M.E. : The Immune Response: Basic and Clinical Principles. Burlington: Elsevier/Academic Press, 2006. Mak, T.W., and Simard, J.J.L. : Handbook of Immune Response Genes. New York: Plenum Press, 1998. Paul, W.E. (ed): Fundamental Immunology, 7th ed. New York: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012. Roitt, I.M., and Delves, P.J. (eds): Encyclopedia of Immunology, 2nd ed. (4 vols.). London and San Diego: Academic Press, 1998. Innate Immunity: The First Lines of Defense

As introduced in Chapter 1, most microbial invaders can be detected and destroyed within minutes or hours by the body’s defense mechanisms of innate immunity, which do not rely on expansion of antigen-specific lymphocytes. The innate immune system uses a limited number of secreted proteins and cell-associated receptors to detect infection and to distinguish between pathogens and host tissues.
560

Questions. 526 13-20 Intracellular bacterial pathogens can evade the immune system by seeking shelter within phagocytes. 563

References. 527 13-21 Immune evasion is also practiced by protozoan  parasites. 565 13-22 RNA viruses use different mechanisms of antigenic variation to keep a step ahead of the adaptive immune system. 566

Chapter 13 Failures of Host Defense  Mechanisms 533 13-23 DNA viruses use multiple mechanisms to subvert NK-cell and CTL responses. 568

Immunodeficiency diseases. 533 13-1 A history of repeated infections suggests a replicate until immunity wanes. 571 diagnosis of immunodeficiency. 534

Summary. 573 13-2 Primary immunodeficiency diseases are caused  by inherited gene defects. 534

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 573 13-25 HIV is a retrovirus that establishes a chronic combined immunodeficiencies. 535 infection that slowly progresses to AIDS. 574

Fighting infectious diseases with vaccination.
